The introduction that you just heard is heard of Lee Edmunds, his portable synthesiser, and David Greene also
helped. I think it's sort of traditional by starting behind time, with 10 minutes behind time, that we hope to catch up. Which of the next panel?
Well, I would sort of like to as coordinator of the chairman, Paul Stokes, never having attended a science fiction convention before, sort of
wanted me to introduce the convention, since I have attended a few. And so I'd just sort of like to give the welcome to everyone, everyone that's
come from the state of the 12th Australian Science Fiction Convention. And this is in fact the first Australian convention to be held in another
state outside of Sydney or Melbourne. And
I suppose this is some sort of a third. And, well, I think at this stage, the first of all, I should introduce our guest of honor, which is John
Follister, who's the...
And the, well, the man is going to be sort of introducing a lot of the Paul Stokes on my next... The
little fellow in the corner at the tape recorder is Rod Hannah and
he's told me that he doesn't want anyone to touch the expensive equipment over there. So don't touch him.
Responsible for the film is John Hewitt on my right.
And the guy that's going to give you some music this afternoon is Mike Clarke in the blue on my right.
Well, there's other people that you're going to meet during the convention. People like Jeff Harris who's sitting down at the front. And some of
his helpers, namely Joy Window. I think the only other committee member here at the moment responsible for the auction is Paul Anderson up near
the bank.
Well, at this stage we've got a few announcements to make. First of all, anyone that hasn't collected banquet tickets should go down and see Gary
Mason some stage afternoon. And also anyone that wants to go to the banquet and hasn't bought a ticket should go down and see him because they're
selling fast. and we've got a limit of 40 attending the banquet, and it's almost full up, I believe. I've also been informed by Lincoln College
people that cars should not be parked out in the alcove down there. In fact, they should be left in the street, apparently. Also, there's a coach
machine at the back of the room, which is 10 cents. There's a coffee machine as well, which should be operating.
And there is one alteration in the program. At 6.30pm
John Breeden's comic slides has been changed to sometime after the awards banquet. And I think that's the only alteration at the moment.
Something without further ado we'll call the past two, which is just on time. Start with the panel. If Daleks do, why don't you? Which is going to
be introduced by John Hewitt and Paul Stakes. One small announcement. Don't go touching the film screen. It's hanging by hair at the moment. I'd
rather it didn't fall down.
We'll draw you into the conversation or use it as an other step. Right. Go ahead. Ah, shit works. Ah. Good afternoon. With the ever-growing
permission in our society, we have decided that it's time that we looked at sex in science fiction. All right, go on. Well, we're going to read
some example packages from various books I've picked out that I see there are children in the audience. No, we won't. We will, however, discuss
various aspects of sex and science fiction over the years. I can't think of
any. Why don't you tell us about some of the books you've been reading in the last week? Yeah, so I've been borrowing a large number of books from
Alan and plowing my way through them. Things like The Standing Joy by Wyman Gwynne.
The Book of Skulls by Robert Silverberg. Didn't quite finish that one, it's rather dull. Productions of Time by John Brunner. I might as well
start discussing some writer's aspects to sex. I'll start with Silverberg, I imagine over here somewhere.
I guess there are various ways you can look at sex and science fiction. You can have either, in dividing the categories, you can have either
sexual customs in a future society, totally alien forms of sex, sex recognizable forms of sex on an alien, and various aspects like this. And
then again there's just normal Almost normal sex introduced into a science fiction book just not really as part of the plot. In the book of Skulls
by Silverberg, he depicts sex in a future society. They're allowed to know not so far in the future. Four young men go looking for immortality.
The sex in it is I guess, more or less, the way sex is in New York nowadays. A very casual you go along, you pick up a member of the opposite sex for the
night. Yeah, that's it. But surely he's just sort of introduced sex into this book because it's sort of contemporary. And then he's just sort of
wanting to sell the book, put a bit of sex into the box and not really relevant to the plotters. Not really. Moving along. Moving right along the
world inside. This is the one I meant to pick up in the first place. In this, there are a large number of people, e.g. something like a million
people living in one building, two miles high. Now, fairly obvious sexual customs in a society like that are going to be much different. In this
case,
There exists almost a society of free love. Anyone can walk in your front door and demand a sleep with your wife and you can't say no.
Whether, I think, although he seems to indicate in the book that most people go along with this, I don't think anyone really agrees with it. There
still exist forms of jealousy. Nice place to visit but you wouldn't want to live there I suppose. True. I'd say it would be better. I think in the
world inside The free-love aspect is freely accepted by the majority of people. Not so. There's one character in it who was very jealous about
his wife. There's one character out of how many millions? Well, it still was very right in the book about a typical group of people inside the
building. I think he did. I think he wrote the book about a typical part of future society.
Yeah, but it seemed to me on reading it, I guess it was just personal impression that there wasn't anyone in it who subconsciously really liked
other people walking the front door and sleeping with their wife. I mean, he doesn't say it. And those people are people in particular
positions. One is fairly high in administrative ranks. One is a historian studying sex customs in the 20th century. One's a musician. Don't you
think that in this book, the world inside, despite sort of being presumably tolerant towards sex, they aren't really tolerant towards sort of
abnormal human behaviour and that everyone says cramped that they've got to sort of tolerate one another and sort of like the guy in that book was
cast out and he was finally, he was killed, so... Yeah, one chap had to leave the society, but... Well, despite being sort of liberal in one
respect, they sort of turned out to be It was not really free love in that case, it was enforced. You know, you have to go out. Well, it looks like a
free love society on the surface, but as I said, I don't think any of them really... like people walking in and saying, you know, I want your wife at
some stage. That I seem to be walking somewhere else and saying, I'd like your wife. He was only one character in a small chapter of the book. I'd
think he more of the historian here. I think he actually objected to other people sleeping with his wife. I just have a question. In Pondland
town, there's two dollars to one of you. What do I have in my life right now? And there's two dollars. Well, we only have one dollar, but that's
the whole thing. I think I came up with that phrase at the committee meeting. It was just because it rhymed well that we decided to. I mean, you
know, it seemed a better title.
The man inside the Dalek probably enjoys it. The
Dalek's perspective is that there's a party and a court. And
there's that discussion over there. So the Dalek's perspective is generally like, I think I just, um, clean
the brain I'm
afraid you've had to remove the sexual organs on our tail, like they're going on TV.
Anyway, moving right along. You sort of want to comment on the fact that sort of every sexual interlude in a silverberg will sort of breathe like
every other. Silverberg. In other words, there's a world inside the section that reads exactly the same as in The Son of Man, which is exactly the
same as in Time of Changes.
It gets to the stage where it's just like railway carriages coupling and uncoupling. There's not to be mechanical about it. Well, I seem to have
had that light anyway. Yes. Oh,
God. I thought you were a junior member. I think it's going to be his books. I think it would make quite a case that he's probably the most prurient
writer in the fiction. He really seems to draw a second world wall just to use them. Quite ordinary science fiction novels. I thought it was
joking serious when you write that text. In simple words it says, in this term, you know, free love, whatever it means, that there's a difference
in the length
of the text.
I don't think it helps
the narrative. And
of
course some of his stuff was published in Ted White's amazing and sort of using trendy, all that words in amazing things like the second trip
which is another silverberg book It sort of caused quite a few, or apparently, when it was published. Well, they kiddie's magazines. You can't
put more than a word into the paperback market. It's supposed to be different. But, I mean, you just pick up every five, six magazines and you know
that there's ain't a lot of lesbians, except Reynolds perhaps. Yeah, we hear from the adolescents, yes. Yeah,
I
agree with you that Silverberg's sex is very tedious, or at least I think it is. Son of a man, I don't think I read more than a third of the book before
I gave up. I just found that it's nearly all totally unrealistic sex and it just didn't mean anything to me. Shall we move on to discuss someone
else? How about Phil Farmer? This is the only book of Phil Farmer I've ever read. I've only read about the first chapter in which he has a woman.
Time stop. Are you aware that farmers can write the first few pages of that? Oh, well, no wonder. I didn't read the article. No, I thought the girls
were just getting ripped off and all that sort of thing. Yeah, yeah. Well, that appeared in the vegan edition that the series of 60 pages of that
article was removed from the late 50s. And the editors always wrote an introductory chapter It's not in the original edition of Mock and Run in
the magazine. Yes, and the only one they didn't have to write in production, too, was either Flesh, or it could have been a boy. Well, there's only
one type of A-type, which they did not have to write as juic-y as an example.
Actually, I don't think this time stop is a very good example of Philip Jose Farmer's work, which includes Sex and Science Fiction, because I
think it's one of his most boring books. Probably one of the... I can't say that bad. Time stop? I think it was possibly one of the three best books.
Well, I haven't read it in my years. Can we get back to that?
Well written but I think it's still rather boring compared to some things like the Riverwald series.
What would you consider Lord Tiger's science fiction? I haven't read it. I don't know.
It's
fine. It's fine.
Then again, Farmer seems to have sold out from writing a genuine sort of science fiction novel with alien sex ideas, something like The Lovers,
and he's sort of gone on to disrupt pornographic novels for Essex House. Have you read any of the so-called pornographic novels you've read yet?
No, I have actually, yes. I think they're far better than The Lovers, and far better than anything that he's done in sex with everybody. Well,
I suppose they're sort of... Yeah. I'll
say
something about John Boyd. I just, a couple of weeks ago, I read Sex and High Command just particularly from this panel. I don't think Boyd has any
idea whatsoever about what sex is about. Well, the idea
of this is
that
women in the world get hold of something, which is a substitute for their normal sex life, something called vital alert. does away with men
apparently they shove it up there, wipes it, and gives them a big kiss. They're called
V-bombs, aren't they? Apparently, somehow, it also causes fertilization, you know, doing away with men completely. And I found that the men in
this book were totally emasculated. Don't know. When women refuse them, they're totally incapable of doing anything about it. In general,
from what I've read of Boyd, Either his heroes are superstars, you know, they go through so many women that's unrealistic, or else they just
can't approach a woman at all. I don't think there's a single man of male character I've come across in a boyd novel who has what I consider to be a
normal healthy sex life. In this, when the, you know, the men, the women review their men, the men just don't do anything about it. They're
totally incapable of doing anything about it. The average guy would rape his wife if she said no, or divorce her one or the other. You're talking
about it just in terms of sex and not getting sex, but what about in science fiction aspects? This is supposed to be a future society where women,
you know, mentally don't feel they don't require men anymore, and they now physically don't require men anymore. I mean, you know, the men seem
to have grown up with a gigantic inferiority complex, so they're not good for anything. You know, it's the type of thing, you know, and they
just... other natural selection dying off, you know, the weakest to surviving because they're the most servile, anybody who's any threat is
done away with.
So, can you give us some suggestions
as well? Boy who committed suicide, because if you remember, four went to find a mortality and only two could have. One had to voluntarily die,
one had to be killed. When the guy who voluntarily died, how do you realise he had a life of a homosexual? What an awful cliché, isn't it? It wasn't
absolutely necessary. They could have got any character as mentally unstable committed
suicide.
I think it would be a bit unusual that out of four people, two of them are actually have homosexual tendencies. In that, one of the characters, and
this is, well, not strictly homosexual, he's bisexual. Well, perhaps, I don't know if I'm going to wait until I've raised it, but could you find
some good examples of sex and time, if you can? Sure, there must be some.
Well, Robert Heinle's Glory Road, I think is the main character in this, has a reasonable approach to sex. It seems to me to be the approach of a
typical army soldier. you know, have it where you can find it. But surely that's a cop-out, John, it's a fun book. True, true. It's just, you know,
it's a recountable book, or it's improved on it. The only effect is that it has a lot of fun effects, you know, and you can have a good laugh about it.
Surely it's one of the shortcomings as far as you can edit it. The fun effect is, you know, permissible. It's the first thing good. It wasn't any
fix on stage in Glory Road anyway. It was all sort of delayed until after the end of the chapter or something. He even sort of copped out when we were
sort of showing some girls to have sex with and they turned out to be looking too young. I don't think he was really realistic in that respect. No, I
don't really think so.
Actually,
the Old Piano Evil is a more recent one, which is called Timing Up for Love. which in fact deals with infest and he's sort of having with his mother
and his sisters and everyone in the dog and he sort of, yeah. Since you're about the only one who's read it. He's getting on to that. He's getting to
be a real dirty old man, I'm afraid. Yeah. Yeah, you can see that in Heinlein you can see the, you know, graduation after about 1960 you never touch
sex, apart from saying, girl, the woman, cuddly. After that, you know, get books which are typical of Glory Road, in which it's known that the
hero sleeps with the woman, but they're no, you know, explicit sex, or anything, from what you say in the latest books. But even in the latest one,
it's still sexual fun, so he doesn't really want to get too serious. I think he had a sort of something, you know, about his mother though. It's a
time travel story and the character goes back and falls in love with his mother. He was a good food cook. Pardon? All you zombies. That's very
similar. His own father and mother. What's the point?
We're going to get to the point where we can get to the point where we can get to the point where we can get to the point where we can get to the point
where we can get to the point where we can get to the point where we can get to the point where we can get to the point where we can get to the point where
we can get to the point where we can get to the point where we can get to the point But it has a very nice t-shirt. I'm just wondering if you could get at
it for a second. I've got the number about six. That's right. I've got about six numbers before. I don't think this is perhaps where someone's
fiction is working. That journalist was considered someone's fiction about six, about six numbers before. I don't think this is perhaps where
someone's fiction is working. That journalist was considered someone's fiction about six, about six numbers before. I don't think this is
perhaps where someone's fiction is working. That journalist was considered someone's fiction about six, about six numbers before. I don't
think this is perhaps where someone's fiction is working. That journalist was considered someone's fiction about six, about six numbers
before. I don't think this is perhaps where someone's fiction is working. That journalist was considered someone's fiction about six, about
six numbers before. I don't think this is perhaps where someone's fiction is working. That journalist was considered someone's fiction about
six, about six numbers before. I don't think this is like the surgeon story of all being my brothers, which you wouldn't want to marry your
sister, in that description of the world. But even then, he was coy and avoided the use of
the word Pollywood use. One thing, you've got a sort of distinguish between sort of novels striving to be just sort of trendy in that, by
including sex scenes and sort of stories that you're sort of talking about, like Ted Sturgeon's earlier stuff, which does include sex. Is that
sort of an inherent part of the plot? I think more than human is another interesting event. Sort of a guest alt then. Sort of some reasonably
realistic descriptions of what I thought to be sort of reasonable people and characterizations. Especially the, I think, 803 novel there.
I think that
I would
actually
just
Two people say that a lonely one is way together, especially a sort of alien being.
They're obviously attracted to one another, so why
not? Well there's another aspect of sex and this is alien sex which is totally unrealistic, e.g. supposing a race which has six different sexes.
I personally can't recall anything, having read anything even like this, I don't know if anyone in the audience has.
I don't know how he worked at the house. He did what? What have you got? Supersection, subsection, and intersection. You've got only most of that
cut. Intersection? Break it down. English? How about the Sheldon, the boring sex group who would
have a problem? Yes, I can look at the way. If you've done one for two points and think that you better have children that haven't been involved for
three hours ago, please run home and take children. Mine was over 16. And I think that if you don't have all these people, then you never get rid of
them. I don't know, of course. If you don't, I'll take you. That's right, I'll make one for you. Because we're in the middle of nowhere. Yeah, of
course. What's the plan for the 21st day? We would. Actually, Jeff, I think there are many sectors that there are people who can start with that.
And that's very contentious.
We would. At the end of all, I'm a little happy to say that the various versions when you get out of the table, please take a look at that. Please take
a look down at the line or not. What do you get, though? Oh, I think I'll have to go to the hospital. No, I'm just kidding. I have, uh... If it's all he
has in mind, it's sort of not a very good example to take.
We're going to talk about Shakespeare, but I don't
know Shakespeare is one of them. Yes, I have. I thought I asked that a while ago. Yes, yes, yes, yes. I don't need that so much. Actually,
you know, if everyone's talking about a boy, sort of no one's mentioned one of his novels, which I think is rather amusing, it's all about sex
rackles of heaven. in, I think, this novel more than any, sort of, get the idea that Boyd's having everyone on anyway and sort of can't really
believe his characters because he doesn't believe in himself. The reason for this is the character. It's a trick when you're not a very good
writer to begin society across the right from the left. And I'd say on the right from the left, it's sort of unreal, but that's not the case in my
judgment. On the other hand, I think that's the last 40 pages of the pollinated debate. As good as, if not better, anything that their students
don't look similar, you know, as opposed to the Ukraine, the rest of it, the book is pretty bad, but that's why I'm thinking of the playwright and
we're taking the woman away. It's very, very well done. It just goes to show, I proved my earlier point that these characters don't have a
still-done-can't-approach-a-normal-sex relationship. They've got to do it via a file. I think it's a more sexual nature than, you know,
you're getting what they're the right thing to do. All right. Be careful, John. It's a phrase that usually brings out what he's written. But you
know how he's getting this phrase like normal sexual relationship when you're discussing the bizarre sexual relationship, so it's not a
fiction. It's not a fiction, it's about the normal. Yes, he's kind of quiet, I think. It is very, very ageing in the farming world. Now, the ethnic
household images of these could not have been written without the wild and weird sexual imagination poured into it. And because it doesn't have
any of the restrictions of the science fiction sphere, he could really, pardon the phrase, let's go. In some
way I think you've got to define a good sex relation and I suppose that is one that you enjoy without... one that your partner would enjoy and you
wouldn't have any guilt feelings or complexes about it. You'd have a hell of a time being called a romanticist, Trump. Yeah,
but that's part of the enjoyment
side, I guess. OK, I'll try.
You
know, okay, you're speaking about sort of abnormal or this sort of different sort of sex relationships, not about the relationship that the
character in the Ellison story has to his dog. If anyone's read this story, is this sort of a love story or what would you consider that? Well, not a
whole lot of it, they're both in the top story. You may recall that Stella Sturgeon went to find a conversion Has any one thing done to the
explosion of all others and that includes the missionary position? This helps to do when we talk about normal station life.
Calmly? What's
the missionary position? We've done it with the missionary.
They're talking about alien sex, what about in the film Strange Relations? There's a series of stories in that, and there's one chap in there who
has been married to numerous aliens,
as he travels throughout the galaxy. There's a spider woman, an octopus woman. There's another one, a giant blob, which molds itself around
him. And I think he finally gets trapped inside some giant snail or something like that. Who would you classify that in? Well, they have stories
about death. And of course, in them, power explores the protagonist's relationship to his mother, to his sisters. Each year, since I've
written stories, I've already tried to tell some of them. They're sort of psychological fantasies, they're extremely Freudian. And they are
about, say, they're not about normal, sexual relationships.
And certainly in two of those relationships, for example, he's doing a whole lot of wishful thoughts. I mean, he's writing about what he's
doing. He's really playing out sexual activities, you know. He's just, wow, feeling about it, you know. It's the same as a part of an
Australian-Israelan plan. You get so excited over that. Boy and girl scouts next to them, you know, you know, they swap around, and you're like,
oh, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee,
gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee,
gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee Would
you write that it's good sex and science fiction, or good sexual science fiction? I wouldn't use a label like that. I would say that it's an
interesting science fiction story that explores various sexual attitudes and relationships on
a psychological level. I think that there was one open to me, my sister. which has been found in science fiction, that was probably the last in
those particular series, which was almost a precursor of the Essex house novel, which had the great long, snake-like thing going down the
hero's mouth, which you may know before. Of course, you know, there's a world-removement of Silverberg's house, where he is just injecting
sexual relationships into his stories to juice them up. Well,
would you say that you're saying that Silverberg and Jack's sexual relationships and their stories, would you say that Compton does the same
thing in one of his stories? Well, there's always Jack's Silverberg's stories, his things thrown in. It seems to have some great filing system
of characters and actions and reactions
and emotions.
He doesn't have to be trained in a random chapter. There's no real feeling at all. So naturally the 16s don't work, because they're dragged in,
and all the other ones, like the homosexuals, they're dragged in, you know. They're all taken out of sexuality, the guys have to kill
themselves, you know. There's no real conviction, I can't believe in any of those writings. I tried reading the second trip recently, about 50
pages to a journey. He's shrieking so loudly. sort of you read one and you read them all especially with the sex scenes.
Perhaps something we haven't discussed yet is perhaps we have briefly in the world inside of the society in which sex is governed, controlled,
e.g. in the wanting seed by Anthony Burgess. The main theme of this book is that because of overpopulation the government is advocating and
encouraging homosexuality and castration and anything in fact to limit births.
Do you think I've got any comments? No, it doesn't work. The populace eventually rejects it. That's usual. In one way or another. The whole
society breaks down. So in fact they start eating each other. Do you think sooner or later... The panel reads the written article, which I've
written about, I think, about the getting of events in science fiction. on the external population problem, and that's a very good line, where
it's just something that the whole problem was trying to suppress in so-called unnatural aspects over the years. It's so natural, in terms of,
for instance, He
was just saying that anything really unnatural was sort of something like a poor side of a triangle or something like that. You know, nothing but
the barrens, the trims, the feathers, all the castings there. You know, it's unnatural. They think people do it. Well, it's natural, yeah.
Well, by definition, it's natural. Well, it's something unnatural, sort of like flying without wings. That's what he was getting at. If people
do it, it should be there. We should be there. People, by definition, be natural. Well, I think the engine is quite a mess. Perhaps,
since we had a question about Supergirl a while ago, I might recall talking about Larry Niven's article on Superman and his sexual life.
It's all a myriad of ways. The
very favorite man is a man of steel and he should have no real control over the exceptional act made for Stardes. going to rip the women, the woman
apart the minute he starts making love to her. And yes. And
what is playing in the film? Is it a super dog or is it a super dog? It's a super dog. It's a super dog. It's a super dog. It's a super dog.
No, they have serious side effects.
I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I
can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't
believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't believe I can't
believe I can't believe I can't believe I mean,
I can't do it the
way
we do it. How do we do it? I don't know if
you've got one John Brummers in Productions of Parliament, do you want to mention that one? Yes, we can just cast John Brunner for a while. We've
still got 20 minutes if you will.
The idea of this book, while they don't actually have any explicit sex in it, is that people from the future like to sort of take thrills. What kind
of kisses? You know, sort of, you know, pluck yourself in and have a thrill that someone else has experienced. And they get together a bloke who's
keen on pornography, a drug addict, a bloke who's was an alcoholic, now recovered, but can't touch the stuff. Homosexual, lesbian, throws them
all together and tries to get some good stuff on tape for people in the future to enjoy.
Comments? I think there's another one that's run as a novel where he's dealing with sexual perversions. I think possibly it's a little bit like
Silverberg and he's just tossing these things in and just for the readers entertainment and sort of it doesn't read that well anyway. The
general theme of this book, I mean the whole theme of the book is sort of wrapped around this plot of perversions but Brunner seems to shy away from
actual sex scenes. His sex is more or less indirect, although he doesn't seem to write it into the plot a lot better than some other writers. He
makes, you know, it's necessary it comes in. So, look, let's get off John Brunner. Let's talk about the six things in there. Is anyone sort of
ready, uh, six things and half of Clark's books? Yeah. Yes, he is. Yeah. Oh, what's that? It's a red full of six things and all the signs, which it
is. It's a full of wind. Oh, yeah. Uh, move it. Uh, the place you call Moonland of the East down into this so-called lunar dust, and at one stage, a
very noble, uh, city technician or something goes for it, or somewhere, which is similar to where it was. And when they come back, all it has to do
is go in one more lane, one more lane, and he says, hmm, they have been thinking, not before, And I can think it will do it. It's embarrassing to hear
a little written. On the other hand, has the panel read a sense into it by D.G. Comfort? Yes, sir. Yes, ma'am. About sexuality and sexuality in
particular. From what level? From a short story of Frederick Paul called Daimler. From what I've read of Compton, which isn't very much, it
seemed to me that he always liked to make sex appear dirty and something that should be hidden away. I'm not hidden away, but he likes to make it
appear dirty and something that you feel revolved with. I think it's
very real and that's why many people didn't expect it. Perhaps it appeared
to me that his character is just a period dirty, none of them. I wouldn't be friends with any old ones, they really existed. And the radio is just
very bright now. And it does feel this way. I mean, if you vomit, it's a toilet rather than a drink in front of a husband. Well, on the other hand,
there's lots of jolly good sex in chronicles. Well, you just, you know, if you fancy someone, you can just say, how about it? Well, together, I
think 30 or 30 in chronicles is a tremendously moving sequence through the circuit, when being up forcibly makes love to the, you know, ladies
and gentlemen, question. I suppose you can see that already. That was the one I was thinking of, actually. Yes, well, as I said, there is a
distinction between aggressive, love-making, and rape. It's a very subtle one sometimes in fiction. But I've found that particular scene
extremely moving in the very opposite of the characters, certainly not 30s and 90s. Once again, that's a big difference. But maybe I'm doing it
all the time. Speaking
of putting the experiences on tape, there was a good eight-paper back a few years ago. I think there was a big ball of wax, wasn't it? Where they
feed signals directly into the brain and they're bypassing the whole problem and direct effects in the head as it is. It was all in the
imagination anyway, I think. all these sort of versions you can have, you can have a trip all the way up to where they, you know. I reckon, for
reason-wise, I've come down to the north a little, quite a lot of the times, it's like, the way it matters, the depth of it. Would be. For depth.
That was right to mine, too. You saw that? I know the books. Yeah. I want
to do that, but I can't do that. I need to think. I need to think. I need to get this one done.
You
know, it's a sort of... Call it television. Not what it means to be sick. Quite literally, I've opened all sorts of possibilities. It's just up to
the guy's imagination. They can do anything if it's all in the brain, isn't it? I was sort of giving him sexual experiences from his childhood,
and there was some very effective sex themes in that book, actually. I'm going to talk a little bit about what I think is the sake in long distance
against the Iron Train. The reason why we can do the sake is because Longdale has the whole thing in general. It's great to be able to do the sake.
I'm glad to hear the sake. You read too much of that afterwards. Michael Morcox describes his so-called source and sourcing novel as pure text
novels. But it's in his imagery and all his subliminal techniques, there's one which he has described and it's just a very long night of love. Of
course, in the process, people had each other dead, the actions they played over two years. but all he was trying to transform the coin was to move
up a little bit better. But reproduced in a surrealistic fashion, I have a good feeling that, you know, with most topology, which puts us there.
It's one of the early storm bringer books. It was the second one. It was the second one. It was the second one. Of
course
behold the man as the sort of sex and that realistic sex of the character masturbating at childhood and who goes back three times. What?
Yeah. Yeah, but they're late on work. What page? Actually, yeah, I'm just talking about symbolical sex. What about the story in, I think it was
quark number two, where the preparation of one's beloved for dinner. Which is a, you know, a nice love story. Which the young woman is told how to
prepare her boyfriend for supper. Sort of three things. Really good. Really good, isn't it? Yes.
Of course. I don't know, but don't poke your dally's
in your play home. Something I'll assume about sex and fantasy, you seem to have read most of fantasy. I guess it's more restrictive than science
fiction, you haven't got all the gadgets, science can get you to help you along. You can say what you think of Conan's sex life. I don't know. It
always seems to be happening. He never seems to get in. He rides off into the sunset with a maiden under one arm and his horse between his legs, and
that's the case.
He never seems to really get anywhere. He seems to be in favour of hanging around with big strong men all the way around.
You mean,
you know, he meets the girl and he takes her up to the bedroom, then you get dot, dot, dot, and then it's the next day.
interest
in violence, in vampirism, and horror films in general. And it doesn't even matter, depending on whether the hero, lay as a heroine, because the
whole story is filled with sexually satisfying experiences on that straight plane. I mean, fantasy is essentially unusual sex. And not just,
not a huge explicit thing, it's a steal. I mean, if it gives you a shot, if they want to read a novel that's explicitly sexual, they can go over with
any of the popular sex novels in the show. But the success, the mind, sort of in the sorcery novels in particular, seems to me, the very simplistic
sexual nature I mean, we're looking at massive souls, you know. I've never had a six-foot-two guy come to shop for a soda and soda, you know.
that they will get kicked out of the sort of sorcery levels and banned by horror films. They will get kicked out of the sort of sorcery levels and
banned by horror films. They will get kicked out of the sort of sorcery levels and banned by horror films. They will get kicked out of the sort of
sorcery levels and banned by horror films. They will get kicked out of the sort of sorcery levels and banned by horror films. They will get kicked
out of the sort of sorcery levels and banned by horror films. They will get kicked out of the sort of sorcery levels and banned by horror films.
They will get kicked out of the sort of sorcery levels and banned by horror films. They will get kicked out of the sort of sorcery levels and banned
by horror films. They will get kicked out of the sort of sorcery levels and banned by horror films. The swords have felled similar to that. How
many years have you been a vampire? This guy, you don't think he's a fan of a girl's neck or a friend? Because lesbian vampires are becoming much
more explicit these days. And I fully expect that some of these sort of three novels will basically become more explicit. I don't think there's a
set in the Elbrich novel that is explicit to take. What did you say? If it's a start, if it's a, if you can't make a crack in the, in the, in the, in the
religion. It's close. They made us a tune. Don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't,
don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't,
don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don
Why are
horror films so popular
with young girls? Well, then what was the very first world, that was Witchcraft, the immediate post-given range. The old girls, over 20, don't
have any nearest-much-feeling to the witchcraft
genealogy. They get more of the water-setting, factory-like astrology, and tarot, and stuff like that. I think it's very interesting that
very young girls read and do it in between novels and vampire novels and horror to get the pants get onto the ones that hurt. Since we're running
out of time I think we'll keep moving along and reach a good climax. Do you want to say something cool? Actually,
if anyone's read an anthology, I think it's a thing within my eyes, I think there's a very good short story in there with the building humorous sex
situations. All sorts of bizarre bisexual relationships occur in between the hero and the aliens. Unfortunately, I haven't got a book here so I
can't read any of it out. That's sort of rather good, but then again, his novel, I think it's When Harley Was One, contains some very bad sex
relations. Sort of almost as bad as probably worse than Silverberg, but since it's one of his first novels, I guess it's excusable to say. Yeah,
and it's Paul says it's just sort of just pops in halfway through and that's what we hear about it, you know. We're hardly having this crisis, you
know. All of his name is often paired with the one in the doctor, isn't it? The New Zealand Coop is not allowed by the sort of group in the shop
without a computer. It makes for the female. I don't know what it's about, but the panel thinks it's a future for this type of fiction, you know,
machine computer. Well, in this new Heinlein novel, the female computer marries Lazarus Long and becomes a clone, the consciousness of the
computer, clones it with a body which is force fed and grown and marries the hero. So it's in line with the computer. And then there's a computer in
one of the islands of Moon at the Harsh Mistress which has an ore gas and when it sees half the earth line up.
What
about Hal 900 in 2001?
His voice is very ambiguous in that. What second Hal? I think he sounds that much ambiguous. I think
both
the astronauts
there
were
pretty asexual Actually,
the computer in Barbarello was much more interesting than the relationship with Barbarello. You mean Rashi outwrites the machine? Oh, that's
the thing. It is an instance. Sort of a hazard for the sexual organ.
That's an example of sex in the SF film they did in the Anyone like to hazard a guess as to what form sex will take in future esophageal. You think
because more explicit sex scenes are allowable now, writers all tend to include explicit sex scenes in their books and shy away from the unusual
sex. I guess that's the sort of one hazard in that they're going to use more explicit sex and not use so much imagination. I just sort of became more
pornographic, and rather than more unusual sex scenes, he said that Phil Farmer's books, the ones he's written for, they're not so much better
than what he'd written when he was just writing SF, like Time Stopping. Well, it's certainly more amazing and more erasing and Well, you know, I
think they certainly, I'll certainly more imagine, when Farmer bought and stopped out at any of his pictures, like the Ripple World, I think we
really left that interview as go. Well, I don't think anybody's approached him. What, do you mean a little snake in the womb, that sort of thing
that lives in the womb of a young lady? No, there's a whole sexual terror that means to truly terrify it, because it has never been done in science
fiction in that way. It's done for the relationship. It really turns into a wolf when the guy is taken up with the tantrum I thought there was a bit
with the iron teeth on there, the guy was a bit prudent. That killed everybody, it was definitely the first chapter of the series. And the most
terrifying line that's made up is CLT. So there's this little line where he was tripping in and his operative play, and all that sort of finished
the job, but it's something like he warped with his sneaker.
Do
you see that as a possible area in which science fiction may develop more along that lines than as, you know, straight science fiction?
The constitution has made any nature so as a measure of literature. At most point is this bringing into you a civil history sexual relationship
to the most per se, old-fashioned nature which has nothing to make you come into the story. If you're going to rise to that stage, or have a
transomal situation, we are having it everywhere in the book. But if you can't do it, imagine it, please. and differently. I don't know, I don't
know. I think you just invent another tradition. But if the sexual relationship of the creatures are explored and they've opened your mind, I'd
come and I'd go in the window and I'd go, you know, this is what I'm doing. But over there, and here I'm just going to get Christ if I'm going by some of
it clearly and expect probably bring up his friend and have a computer and both of that.
I think we can close then. And, well, if no one has anything else to say, yeah. Well, there is another aspect that we didn't touch on. That film has
been in the sort of situation that you have there. We get population pressure from the police, which is sort of a moratorium on birth. I think it
was 30 years. I'd prefer the T-8-6-1-1-3-8 film to that one. A situation like that would never exist because any government that tried to force
it, if it was a democratic government, would be out on their
neck.
I
think the
government
is tending towards being more non-democratic and that's politics. I think we better sort of close this panel now, too. Oh, gee, just when we get
started. I'll remind people at 3.30 there's a talk by Dr Peter Dullin.
That's right, buddy. Just copy by
it. Who's lecturer in psychology at Adelaide University and who's going to speak on the subject of science fiction in the occult. So I'll just
leave it to him, then. Well, I've been a longtime reader of science fiction
possibly for about 25 years now. I've been absorbing this particular brew. I've also been on the fringes of psychological research for around
about the same period of time. And
I think that this This twin
set of circumstances should have led me long before now to start to put the two together. It's only in fact being invited to speak to you today that
led me to wonder whether there was any connection between the two interests. It may be thought to be insulting perhaps to suggest the sorts of
interests that lead people or the sorts of people that are interested in science fiction are likely to be the sorts of people who are interested
in the occult because we all know some very odd sorts of people who are interested in the occult. I see no evidence looking around me that very odd
people are interested in science fiction And certainly some of the oddest of the people that I've known who have been interested in the occult
have been, or profess themselves interested in science fiction, but usually of the RL fan thought variety. Not of the Arthur Clark or even John
Wyndham variety.
That's one sort of connection, however, and I suppose that a generous way of putting it is that the sort of people who are interested in the occult
and the sort of people who are interested in science fiction are both likely to also be
oriented towards the idea of the universe being a rich and wonderful place in which many extraordinary things can happen. There are, of course,
other ways in which science fiction and the occult are connected. For instance, there are a tremendous number of science fiction novels and
stories which either have occult themes or refer to the occult. Now, I think that if you look at the way in which science fiction refers to the
occult, some very interesting things emerge.
There seem to be, obviously, because science fiction is such a mixed kind of genre,
a number of different sorts of use of the occult in science fiction. In the straight fantasy situation, obviously, it's a dream mechanism or
something of that kind. You can just throw it in to enable things to happen that couldn't otherwise happen. However, and given this, I don't
think there's an enormous amount of point in saying a lot about it on the fantasy side, although it might be worthy of note that one theme that very
frequently turns up in fantasy, which uses the occult as part of its material, that There seems very often to be accepted by the author, and
presumably therefore by the reader, that there's some sort of opposition between regulation science and the accounts. That's in books like,
for instance, The Incomplete Enchanter, which I think is one of the most delightful works, actually, in any area of science fiction. But that
clearly was a sort of fantasy. But one of the striking points was that where magic works, science didn't. That is, the person could do remarkable
things by reciting formulae, but his matches wouldn't work. And I think that's very significant. We will return to that later. But to look at the
more regulation science fiction, I suppose the more science extension sort of science fiction, there where the occult is referred to, very
seldom is it left in the condition in which it is in our everyday world, in the attitudes of people in real life today. That is, there are very few
science fiction books which refer to ESP or any such theme or any occult theme, while at the same time giving much credence to the common view to
their among intellectuals anyway of skepticism. The only one that springs to mind at once as a contradiction to what I've just said is Hoyle's
black cloud where the rather absurd Russian scientist I think had some very hard words to say. about people believing in ghosts and this kind of
thing. But then he said some very silly things anyway, and not a character to be taken seriously. Indeed, I don't believe that any of Hoyle's
characters are characters to be taken seriously. But, leaving that aside, most people have either ignored the occult completely, or their
world of the future, or their possible world, or whatever it is, has accepted psychic events as being fairly normal sorts of things that just
happen
even in something like John Wyndham's chrysalids where clearly telepathy was something which most people didn't expect to happen. It wasn't
because it was unbelievable, but it was precise, so to speak. It was because it was different. There was no suggestion there was anything
unlikely about it. Now, on the other side of the We have the real life situation that there are a tremendous number of people and highly
intelligent, highly educated people who are very, very skeptical. about ESP. I suspect most of these cannot be science fiction readers or
writers. If you'll leave a remarks I've just been making. So there is a perhaps an interesting observation. The sort of people that display the
most typical scientific skepticism about the occult today are not members of our confraternity. Now, this business of skepticism is, I think,
the oddest phenomenon of all in the occult field. And I've, in fact, devoted some attention as a psychologist, it's been something I've been
interested in, in the phenomena of skepticism. And one of the things which is very striking is the way in which skepticism alters your
appreciation of evidence. Why is the atmosphere so different? Or what is it that's so different about the attitude to ESB in science fiction,
even among people that don't, in writing science fiction books, make ESB a central theme or ESB audio cult for that matter?
Well, when you look at, for instance, the chrysalids, what's so weird and wonderful about the phenomenon that's being talked about? All it
appears to be is that certain individuals have got a built-in radio. There's nothing terribly astonishing about it. They have perhaps an
unfair advantage over the rest of humanity in that they can communicate with each other over considerable distances without using apparatus
and so on. But there's nothing particularly odd about it, it's just something that happens.
Similarly, I suppose even in the incomplete enchanted with magic, again, the magic's a pretty casual kind of thing, pretty ordinary, it's just
another kind of technology. It happens to be, as I've suggested in this particular case, postulated that it's inconsistent with the other sort
of technology, the techno technology. But it's a very ordinary, very everyday. The
attitude of skepticism, which the scientific man in the street appears to have towards the occult, in other words, generates some of the oddity
of the phenomena itself. ESP is hard to prove, not because it's a weird, intractable phenomenon, but because people don't believe in it. And I
think that one can illustrate this fairly well by imagining what would happen if one did live in one of these science fiction worlds, in which
there are many, even among people, even the worlds created by writers who are not themselves writing about ESP, in which ESP, or magic for that
matter, are facts of life. If somebody is supposed to be a psi person, and they claim to have got some information from somebody else's mind, the
answer is, oh yes, well, you know, we must stop this happening, or we'll turn to you, we must make use of this ability, or something like this. Now,
in the skeptics world, the result, the immediate question is, how can I know that you've got it from his mind? Now just imagine if you came up to
somebody in the morning and you said, um, I hear that there
was a terrible air crash last night. I think it was in the Lebanon. And the chap says, how do you know? And you said, well, I heard it on the radio.
Expect me to believe that. Prove it. And you try to prove, for instance, that you didn't see a newspaper lying across the back of a chair as you
walked after you were sitting around this morning, or that you didn't get it by ESP.
It would be a pretty intractable sort of task. The fact is the difficulties of the situation are created by the skeptics' attitudes. Now, I am
becoming sort of paranoid about these skeptics because, and I may say, before I go any further, I am not by any means convinced of all aspects of
the evidence about ESP and so on. I just don't know. I'm very much a fence-sitter. But it seems to me that the skeptics are behaving very
peculiarly. In fact,
there are plenty of phenomena that are just as unrepeatable, just as difficult to control the ESP phenomena claimed to be. And I have the
impression that in this field, and indeed in a number of other fields, the skeptic, and it's not only skepticism as we'll see in a minute, is in
fact creating ghosts for itself to chase. that in fact he is making the thing seem a damn sight more mysterious than it need be. I say it's not only
skepticism because I think that I see similar symptoms in certain other areas of activity. I was at a paper the other day given by Professor JC
Smart, who used to be the head of the philosophy department, at Adelaide, and he was talking about modal logic. In fact, his paper was entitled
Possible Worlds, which sounds like a good science fiction-y sort of title, and that's one of the reasons I went. The other reason I went is a very
good friend of mine, but I expected him something fairly gutsy about ideas of possibility. What I actually got was a feverish attack on modal
logic. And why was modal logic being attacked? Because in Jack Smart's analysis of it, it looked as if he was going to have to believe if he wanted
to use modal logic in the simultaneous existence of an infinite number of possible worlds in which different things happened. So that when, in
motor logic, the analysis of, for instance, the statement, if I, Ron Barassi, had imported a few West Australians I would have won, involved, in
fact, in phishing a possible world in which Ron Barassi actually did import lots of Australians and win. Well, lots of West Australians and win.
My view is that in this particular instance, Jack Smart was in fact creating a ghost. There was no philosophical validity in his belief that it
was necessary to actually believe in these possible worlds in order to use modal logic. Now, both Jack Smart and a number of other philosophers
similarly in the area of the problem of mind. appear to be on a crusade against what in fact Jack calls ghost stuff that is the stuff of which mind is
made up he's desperately anxious to avoid a philosophical position which involves him in believing in some mysterious mental substance In
fact, I believe it's perfectly possible to get by without this mysterious mental substance. But it seems to me the interesting thing about his
position on these different topics is that he is creating a situation of mystery in order not to believe in it. But in fact, philosophical
arguments which say that there is a mystery, a weekend philosophical arguments for the position out of which he's generating the mystery. Now
go back to the ESP. Who was it that made ESP so mysterious? Well, it is true that J.B. Ryan started the ball rolling himself by taking a sort of
anti-materialist line. But let's face it, that's just J.B. Ryan. There's nothing in the phenomena which has this weird... ghostly
implication. All that the phenomena say is that some dear robber is getting some information and we don't know how the heck they got it. There's
nothing mysterious or ghostly about that. And when you look at the evidence that, for instance, ESP doesn't obey the laws of ordinary science,
what you find is that that evidence is very weak. very much weaker than the evidence that ESP occurs, for instance. Now look at the skeptics
argument. I've often found myself arguing with skeptics saying something like, um, well, ESP can't occur because there's evidence that
suggests it doesn't obey the inverse swirl. and anything which involves radiation from points got to obey that. Well, then you look at the
evidence that ESP doesn't have any, it did the inverse square law, and that evidence is rotten. In fact, the evidence that ESP doesn't have any
inverse square law is about as strong as the evidence that radio doesn't have any inverse square law. So what's happening is rather like
somebody saying, stands to reason there can't be any unicorns because there wouldn't be enough young virgins to go around.
Well, this is again, I think, a beautiful example of people creating the ghosts that they're not going to believe in. The fact is that nobody
quite knows where science ends and the occult takes over.
There may be people around, and I suspect that Jack Smart, who I'm being very nasty to today for no particular reason, but there are people who
really believe that most of the basic concepts of science are there, laid out, ready for our use, that there's nothing big and new to be
discovered. Now, this seems to me to be, and that is that really, that there are no whole fields of new forces and new sets of laws in which we should
enable things to relate together very differently from the way they appear to the net. And it seems to me this is a very unlikely state of affairs.
And it's a very unlikely state of affairs for a number of reasons. One is, simply that when you look at all the basic concepts on which scientific
thinking is based today, you find that you only have to think for about three minutes to generate a paradox. Whether you talk about time, whether
you talk about cause, whether you talk about Even, I suppose, a relevance, which is a concept which lies behind science very strongly, where
most scientists don't notice it. All of these things generate paradoxes very easily. And Bertrand Russell, among many other philosophers,
pointed out that whenever you come across a paradox, it's about time to be doing some philosophizing. Something is going wrong. There's
something wrong with your basic concepts. Well, this being said, there's room for an immense amount of reshuffling of our basic concepts in
science. Who knows what, when the reshuffling takes place, will appear to be obvious, which appears to be impossible now? Who knows what new
forces there is room for, or new relationships? I certainly wouldn't be so bold as to make any guesses.
Meanwhile, we have claims that there are phenomena.
It's claimed that some people do obtain information from others, which information it seems very difficult to see as being transmitted by any
of the means we know that we're transmitting information.
On the face of it, not a very astounding sort of claim. It is true that when you try to prove these claims, you run up against difficulties. You run
up against difficulties, though, only because the standards of evidence for which you're being required to
reach are being determined by the skeptics. In fact, most of the experiments that someone like in ESP, for instance, that someone like Mark
Hansel dismisses, would be in most branches of science regarded as pretty watertight experiments.
After all, Mark Hansel, in order to discredit an ESP experiment, only has to show that there's some way in which somebody could have cheated.
including an experiment or including if necessary all five experimenters. Now, what branch of science or regulation science could stand up to
this? How many physics experiments do we know that have been carried out under conditions where this sort of cheating has been ruled out?
doesn't very often happen. In fact, a lot of physics experiments, including some of the very simplest ones, not only could cheating have been
carried out a lot of the time, but there's plenty of contrary evidence. You take experiments, very simple experiments, that used to be done
regularly at school, in my school anyway, of showing that you can put ice in the bottom of a boiling tube and boil the water at the top without
melting the ice. I remember having a very revealing experience one day of coming in after that lesson and finding neatly wrapped up in the piece
of wire gauze in which we had thought that these visor field place, nine next to the boiling tube on the desk, was in fact a piece of glass. It's
clear that our science teacher hadn't been that confident and had put one over on us. In fact, he was worth aware that the odds were quite high that
if he tried this experiment himself, it wouldn't work. And indeed, for every once that a scientist has repeated most of the simple scientific
experiments, thousands of schoolteachers and schoolchildren have repeated them and got the opposite results. But who takes that into
account? I'll hardly say the evidence however was consistent. The fact is that the standards of evidence are determined by the level of
preparedness to believe of the people who are the actual critics and judges of those experiments. So we have a situation where we have a
phenomenon which on the face of it doesn't seem, in my view, a set of phenomena which on the face of it don't seem, in my view, all that
intrinsically unlikely and a set of people who are controlling the levels of belief in the scientific community who are influencing on all
levels the response to the data
Now, the science fiction writers, of course, writing of future worlds are not looking at it from the point of view of the scientific skeptic.
They're saying, let's envisage a future world in which we set our adventure, whatever it may be, and Well, one of the things that might have
happened in this future world is that ESP has become accepted. And as soon as it becomes accepted, there it is, a perfectly ordinary part of life.
It may have its problems, it may have a need for new legislation, indeed it almost certainly will. but it doesn't look very odd in that context at
all. Now one concept which I think that scientists really ought to get hold of in fact, or one notion that they really ought to get hold of, which I
think is a very important one, which all that I've been saying illustrates to be important, is this notion that the process of setting a priori
probabilities on events is not a part of science as yet. We have innumerable techniques for assessing evidence in certain fixed contexts, for
designing experiments for reasoning out with some traumatic exceptions. What are the consequences of theories? What should be the
prediction from theories? What we do not have is any scientific techniques for setting a priori probabilities. These are set by nothing more or
less than the atmosphere in the scientific community. And every now and then this leads to quite bizarre results. In 1915, Wagener put forward
his theory of continental drift, which was entirely consistent with the evidence that was available. reasonably by today's standards, and it
would be sane-sounding theory that you had a layer of rock which was actually not quite as solid over long periods of time as it appeared to be over
the short periods of time that we have direct contact with it, and that the consonants were floating on this soft layer and other bits of rock were
floating and moving around. and it traced out the ways in which outlines of various bits of the map, as it is now, would have fitted together, or
very reasonable. In fact, this theory was created by the scientific community. It was a complete score. For some reason, which I can't quite tie
down, it seemed to be just basically unlikely. And for many years, vagueness theory was just a sign to the curiosity that there's a nut called
vagueness who put forward this theory. And weirdly, the consonants almost look as if it might be right, though of course its nonsense was the
attitude. Now, of course, we can measure in inches per year how much the consonants are drifting. But as I say, there's a very good example of
completely capricious assignment of a priori probabilities. And it's the capricious assignment of a priori probabilities to phenomena like
ESP that creates the experimental difficulty in showing that it occurs. And let's say the science fiction writer's use of the concept as an
everyday one illustrates very well that this is the case. As soon as you think in terms of a world in which ESP is not regarded as extraordinary,
then it jolly well isn't extraordinary. That's all there is to it. Clearly there are other areas in the ESP, and a cult doesn't just mean ESP.
Phenomenon like ghosts, for instance, mixing with the occult, as indeed, I suppose, Phenomenon is like the Phenomenon like demons. And
these, of course, also have been treated by science fiction writers, although by and large, Demons and straight magic tend to be dealt with in
the fantasy category rather than in the straight science fiction category. I think there are probably one or two of Sheckley's things that
might be regarded as science fiction as opposed to fantasy which dealt with the year after and so on. I think that's probably science fiction,
just from fantasy. say by and large these are fantasy and one of the reasons they tend to be fantasy I think is because as soon as you start dealing
with magic per se you start getting this thing about the about its opposition to science coming in as soon as you start saying or as soon as science
fiction writers start saying, for instance, you can get this done by muttering this formula. or by making up a little poem or something then
you're dealing in a world which is, I suppose, sufficiently different from the everyday one we're used to that you feel like postulating some
other great differences and you're very conscious of the fact that you're dealing with the abnormal and then I think the
This being so, you're now able to get a kind of anti-science bias, if you like, in your thinking and to exaggerate all of the things which go with
magic, including its distinction from science. And the other thing I suppose is that, you know, I myself, for instance, will assign very low
priorities. to control
the world by much informally. Certainly one can do much informally, but things like making water boil and this kind of thing, I would, on the
whole, think it's rather unlikely, although I stand open to be convinced. And this being so, The person who puts these things into his story must
be aware that he's standing up against the whole background of today's technological thinking. And he might just as well go the whole hog and say
technology doesn't work here.
We work on this other pattern instead.
So, that's what happens with that. Now, with the afterlife concept, I think something else happens. I think we tend to become here when we
operate the science fiction producers.
Be dazzled with the notion of a separate occult, the notion of ghost stuff, As it's very difficult to talk about actual ghosts without thinking
in terms of ghost stuff, it's easy for me to say a PSP, that doesn't involve ghost stuff. Of the mind, that doesn't involve ghost stuff. But when it
talks about, when I come to talk about ghosts, there seems to be something a bit strange about saying that doesn't involve ghost stuff. But on the
other hand, I don't think this is necessarily so. It seems to me that, again, there's nothing In principle, inconsistent
with any science that we have of the idea that a being, by existing as a living being in this world, has effects on some physical aspect of his
environment, which effects persist, which effects continue to act. The whole system is so darn complex that I wouldn't be at all surprised to
find that something akin to personality can still exist in these effects, in the complex of effects that we have on our environment. I'm not
putting this forward as a theory. I'm merely saying that theories along these sorts of lines don't seem to me to be ruled out of court by the
current position of science. Furthermore, suppose they were, suppose the idea of the afterlife, or any of the phenomena associated with
ghosts and
so on, were to involve principles that science has not yet thought of. Under what circumstances would these become occult principles? I've
already suggested there's room in science for a whole lot of new principles. There's room for whole new sets of forces, whole new sets of
relationships. Now, if we're forced to agree that afterlives involve these new sets of principles, new sets of forces that we haven't yet
envisaged,
So be it. But does it follow that these things will be unincorporable in science? Nothing about what I've said so far in any way suggests this. Now
this, I think, brings me back to Jack Smart and his ghost hunting. Here he is saying, I must avoid any theory of the mind and the body which involves
the mind as ghost stuff. But when does the ghost stuff become ghost stuff? What does it have to do? Well, what it has to do is to refuse to be
incorporated in the general body of knowledge in a consistent kind of way. But there's nothing about simply being a kind of stuff we haven't yet
identified that tells one that it has this peculiar property. Now, either Jack is saying, there is no more to be found out. There are no grand new
principles, even if, you know, somebody okay may find some small sort of regulation we haven't thought of, but nothing big, nothing that really
matters. Either he's saying this, and since it's obvious that mind is going to be outside any of the forces that we have and materials that we know
of now, that automatically makes mind ghost stuff, or I would have thought he would have to say, Well okay, if you find your new forces, if you find
your new sorts of scientific interaction, then mind stuff gets incorporated in science, and it's not good stuff anymore. And as I say, what
applies to mine, stuff I see no reason shouldn't apply to ghost stuff. I've no particular reason to think it does. I don't think the evidence for
ghosts is frightfully hard as things are going. I do think the evidence that sometimes when people sit down to guess cards something funny
happens is quite strong. If we're to believe some of the reports emanating from Russia, it's more than just speculation. There's some big
things happening. Unfortunately, these reports don't usually come with clear information as to how to obtain similar phenomena ourselves.
And I think when you get lots of indirect reports of phenomena like this, and no hard data on how to repeat the experiments and this kind of thing,
then you're quite right to be suspicious. And I myself am slightly suspicious. For instance, I actually can remember in animal science
fiction, etc. A few days ago I came across a copy which had an article on about some of the Russian stuff. And talking about this woman who
apparently can actually move objects by cytokinesis. And as if it was just perfectly ordinary thing that she was being studied in a laboratory
with physiological apparatus and so on. And sure, you know, if this is happening then Forget about all the probability stuff, all the card
guessing and attempts to get six to come up more often than chance when rolling dice, you know, here we've got real solid phenomenon. But
unfortunately, the world keeps coming across these reports as I say, nobody gives clear details on exactly how we go about trying to find the
same thing here. And until we do, I think I'm going to remain suspicious I would be suspicious, I suppose, if a colleague in my own area of
psychology kept writing me letters about how he was getting marvelous results on his new theory would never actually describe his experience.
I wonder why he didn't. and he never published any papers in which the expense was clearly written up. So that's a ground for being suspicious.
But leaving aside those perhaps overhoed for reports, nevertheless it seems to me there are sufficient funny things happening in the ESP
research area to make one feel that it all can't be explained
by fakery, bad statistics, and this sort of thing.
Whether what is happening actually is some sort of communication, I'm somewhat hesitant about. It seems to me that the vast majority of ESP
experiments are set out in such a way that anything statistically abnormal that happens is going to look like communication. and it might just
be the statistical things are happening which don't look like communication which we're not dissecting out I mean if you set somebody to guess
cards and somebody else to try to transmit them then you tend to look for various kinds of relationships between the guesses and the targets sure
it looks like one person's sending a message to the other person but what if you found for instance that when a person tried to guess a pack of
cards, there was statistically unlikely relationship between the sequence of guesses they produced and the sequence of targets you would
produce by taking the actual target sequence, reversing it and moving forward. That wouldn't look so much like communication, and then you'd
simply say something statistically unsightly. We're just selecting out the communication lines statistically on things to look at. Now, the
other thing I think is, of course, that there's a lot of... When we come across, for instance, ESP, or individuals with PSI in books by E.C.
Tarden, the sort of person, ESP, again, looks very different from what it looks like in the everyday reports we get of it. The
E.C. Tarp and, for that matter, John Wyndham Psy phenomena are very much like using an internal telephone.
The Telsi-Amberton Psy phenomena are Like our new kind of mental engineering, I suppose, you fiddle around with things by carrying out some
sort of mental manipulation, which you can only imagine if you happen to be Tel-Siamese or someone like that, which theoretically anybody can.
or most people could, to some degree. But it's a kind of engineering and curiously uninvolved kind of operation. Now, the real-life ESP
phenomena accounts fall into two categories which are both very unlike this. They're either the card-guessing ones, in which a current
situation in which the person who's doing it usually doesn't seem to know when he's doing it, That is, he can't tell his good guesses from his bad
guesses, and where there seems to be no special feel attached to the experience at all, except perhaps a feeling of pride if he hasn't got so many
right on something of this kind. The other kind of everyday report is of a spontaneous flash phenomenon which usually is highly emotionally
charged which doesn't seem to be turn-onable at will, and which, when I say it's emotionally charged, it feels special in that the person says,
you know, I had a dream last night which was so extraordinary, I really must tell you about it, I'm sure it means something. I had the funniest
feeling this morning, they say. or something of this kind, but also, of course, the topics emotionally charged normally, in that, you know,
it's usually about thread-falling under a bus or something equally exciting. So with opportune kind, the ESP card guessing experiment type,
the spontaneous emotional communication type, and these are both different from the sort you get in ESP stories. which is the casual
communication or casual mental engineering type. And I think that science fiction is developing a set of conventions, in other words, about
psychic phenomena, which are quite different from what probably the psychic phenomena, if they exist, are like. This has happened in other
fields too. It happens all the time. If you watch television, you'll find there's a whole set of conventions about what mental illnesses are
like, which are all things that go with films. as a whole set of conventions, of course, in detective stories, but walk as to what murderers are
like, and what detectives are like, for that matter, which have little relationship to real life. We know what the rules are within the
particular field. Now, I think in the ESP field, science fiction writers are in danger of creating a set of conventions as to what the accounts
like, or particularly what Psy is like, which bear little relation to real life Psy, assuming there is such a beast. and perhaps it's early
enough in ESP for a corrective to be in science fiction, for a corrective to be administered, though I rather doubt this. Nobody as yet, I think,
has really taken off in their science fiction writing from what we know about. ESP for instance, and incorporated that in a realistic style
story in the future situation.
But anyway, to sum up, there are a number of ways in which the occult and science fiction intersect
They intersect through the common interest of the science fiction reader and writer and the occultist in the universe being a rather less
boring place than it is for the ordinary person. They intersect in that the science fiction writer illustrates for us the effect of in real life
our attitudes to the occult on the evidential situation on what we need if we are to believe in these phenomena and they intersect in that I
suppose they
show something about the way in which our ideas about particular phenomena can
be conventionalised within a particular medium in such a way that they cease to bear any relationship with the real phenomena as they do in real
life. Well, I think that's all I have to say. I'd be very happy if anyone would use to raise any questions or give us any illustrations.
Yes?
Well,
I'm very bad at titles and authors. I think it would be like to know that you've read anything that I haven't read, it's fairly small. Can I run down
the checklist? Yes, indeed, yes, indeed. Going back to you, yes, thanks for being
a pilot, for example. The story is where he wrote about the people volunteering this corporation. It's a relishing their spirit into a sort of a
parallel world, and they're still contactable by the right of the contact people living in this one. With the new materials. You've read that.
There's a type of product that is sort of an old story. Then, of course, there's the thing there that the The genius of the clean individual,
people like that. Pre-cognition. Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes.
Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes.
Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes. Pre-cognition, yes There's priesthood, there are executions inside, producing a god that
eventually becomes the spy of the day, and has effect on them rather than them having effect on human. And an old number of people who are just good
across the class of years of time, in a believable sense, is called, is called, is called by Smith. Yes, yes. I'm not sure, I don't believe it.
the school was a luck changer, in which she was black. She changed everything around her business to be a luck. And somehow or other, the biology
of her shift connected her up to a physical amplify, an amplify of physical science, and broad cast this luck change to the entire planet. What's
happening? We're so bad. Can't control ourselves please. Now who's the captain who has the the dog brain and whatnot, always has a silent
communication officer. A janitor, yes. Then, of course, that's the opposite way around. Then, of course, there's the strike wishful filth,
the Celtian stories, which have no relation to anything real whatsoever. There's no possible connection to anything real. Well, now, are you
sort of Are you trying to
question what I'm saying? I'm trying to say that science fiction basically is telling stories that people want to read and that I agree with you
completely that reality is is very boring, most of the time. And again, we're creating, again we have to say, even if it's physical science, it
doesn't have to be necessarily good science. All it has to be is believable science called time being. It's the same with science, the same with
all the varieties of physical science. There's no difference to science. You don't have to be real. All you have to do is have to tell a good story.
And there is a difference between science fiction which is based on real. There's a difference between science fiction which is based on
provable, demonstrable science. and science which cannot possibly be true, and science which might be true, if only it could drain up a wide
distance. Yes, well, I would have thought that a bigger distinction within something than the ones that you just made when you were sort of
misting the, you know, might be true, could be true, etc. is that I would have thought that there was a great gap between the science fiction which
said, what if we discovered that and went on from there? to the science fiction, which actually starts off by, let's say, denying some of the
things that we believe to be true, and says, and what is instead of science fiction? In fact, in a property of space, to be exact, there's
something quite basic, is not there, or is twisted in some way, to go on from there. But I think there's still a tendency for conventions to arise
even in here. I mean, science fiction, and somebody rather did produce a sort of dictionary of science fictionese recently, didn't they, in
which they had terms like hyperspace, which are, you know, purely science fiction notions, but which ones which are
used throughout science fiction by different writers in different contexts. And it is extraordinary how the science fiction convention, how
wide the science fiction convention has developed. I mean the concept of an alien is in itself. a rather interesting science fiction concept.
Yeah,
but I think it is unfortunate in a way. I want to say unfortunate obviously, you know, if you say you're writing stuff to entertain people and the
criteria are people entertained by it, then who wants to tie it down with rules? On the other hand, I think that it's worth I mean, there are a lot of
people who, when they read science fiction, like to pick something of the, uh, what would happen if variety, uh, rather than what if instead of
what we have so and so, where we're denying the world as it is and saying what if it isn't different and if it was different than this. And I think
that it's a good idea if in these what if ones people are aware when they're when their conventions are departing from the comparison with the
topic which started them off, so to speak. I honestly think that, by and large, if one could get on to the television writers who write things
about mental illness, for instance, and get across to them that what they were presenting mental illness as was their own convention and
nothing to do with mental illness.
You know, I think on the whole they'd rather put it right before they went any further. And the fact is, they can get away without doing so because
they've got a watching public that'll watch anything. But on the whole, it'd be nice if their convention matched the facts to some degree. Thank
you very much. On the convention, if you'd like to go to talk
What I'm going to say now is that there's actually
more than what you might have thought of that way. I think there's a connection with that today. It's been very, sort of, about time to get the
current score ahead of the three backwards. We make it real. Oh, I'm not suggesting... Look, I don't know how I've got myself into this,
actually. I don't want to make prescriptions for science fiction writers. I don't even mind if they ignore the conventions. I'd just like them
to know... I would just wish that they knew when they were doing so, and which ones. And I think that... it would be possible, for instance, to
write science fiction stories which did use our A-science story, if one was interested in doing that sort of thing, which did in fact use a theory
of science of ESP, which was entirely consistent with the data we have now, for instance. I think your basic trouble is you can't really expect
all the people who are writing stories to think up really good theories that stand out under the people of the National Assortment. Every time, a
lot of people get around this by saying, by setting up their own private universes. They don't have to restate all the postulates every time. And
in fact, Chandler is what his doggy has been going around to do all the stuff. He's not made the concepts now, but he doesn't have to restate that by
this time. But the fact that he, maybe this isn't the greatest idea ever, because he spent a lot of time trying to draw parallels between the
evolution of the ferry ship world and years ago, the motor ship and many of the aircraft worlds now. into a future, depending on the status quo.
People who worked out of sort of the system were evolving, and they just usually found themselves hung up against the brick wall. There's one
that I might bring up here, that Mary Middleton has written a whole series of books, not necessarily about the same people, but about the same
evolving history. and he bred himself into a corner because in one of the laser ones he postulated somebody who was bred for luck over a decade
generation. The book's called Wingroom and it's like something quite different. One of the minor things is this lucky girl. Well the point was
if you can't go on very many more generations before you get lost, very lucky people will learn because you feel the rest of us are not in that
trouble. There was no way out if he stopped writing in that particular unit. About four or five years ago it was a pretty good area after which he
had several, that's like the closest thing to ESP was. I think what has annoyed me and at the same time interested me very much in sound fiction in
this particular area has been in a way what's now analog sound fiction during the run of John Campbell. He was well known to have a pretty legend of
stories that pushed this particular era. The theory was, I don't know if it's really true, but the theory going around the line is that if you
wanted to sell a story to the council, you had to bring any of it to do something. And in a way, this is bad, because it's limited to some of the people
who had other quite bad stories and they've never gone around submitting the story. But he did maybe bring up a few new ideas, maybe got a few
people outside the field. I wish there was more clear information on Russian stuff actually.
Someone there wants to ask. The only
thing I come across is a book on witchcraft. by a gentleman who believes has a distinction of holding would first be a witchcraft from one of the
American universities. But that again only refers very peripherally to it. It doesn't give one the sort of details one would want to have one's
skepticism sort of knocked down a little further. And it states very boldly, you know, that the Americans have got great psi research programs
going on on a military basis as well, and you know, it's a matter of some concern whether they can close the ESP gap and all that kind of nonsense.
But no more than that really. What you're trying to say is that you don't object to people about writing about a completely fictitious universe
or some impossible twist or something completely reversed and mysterious. What you're saying is they should know what they do and they should
know all the time and make it obvious in the stories that they know how this conflicts with the available realities that have been tested at the
moment. Well, I suppose in a way I'm saying that, although I wouldn't want to say it quite that strongly. I mean, I don't want to be reminded of
three paragraph intervals. The guy knows this. You were saying that so much writing was floppy. Well, partly this, yes. But the other things,
I'd like to see at least one story which does treat with, you know, with what we do know. And does handle the thing within the evidence. For
instance, Ninian Marshall, some time ago, his philosopher, got himself into an argument with somebody who said ESP was just unclear, you
couldn't make a proper scientific law relating to ESP. So, came up with this one. Well, take the law of gravity. Why can't we have it consistent
with the data we've already got, an ESP law, which matches the law of gravity? It might go something like this. And this wasn't being put forward
as the law of relating to ESP, but simply as an example of one that might do.
First of all, we'll say, patterns in the universe tend to become more similar to one another. Now, this is just like objects being attracted to
one another. Patterns tend to become more similar. And they tend to do so in proportion as A, they are complex.
B, they are already similar. which, of course, corresponds to objects being attracted when they're already closer to one another. It's more of
acceleration and stability. Yeah, right. And C, there is some quantum type indeterminacy in their makeup.
Now, the next thing to note, that is presumably, when people have thoughts, these are very complex patterns. And there must be some similarity
in happening for two people having similar thought. And the human brain is a very, very complex organization. And there is indeed quantum type
indeterminacy or something very close to it in the firing of neurons. That is above a certain level of stimulation. You can't say the neuron will
fire, but you can specify probability of its firing. Now, in other words, patterns in human brains will be the things in the universe that we know
of that will be most likely to obey this law. The law doesn't say anything at all about distance between the patterns. Anyway, this is Ninian
Marshall's law. Now, it would be quite possible to have a science fiction story based on a law like this. The ESP will be entirely consistent with
what we know so far of ESP. It might have to go further, but what Ninian Marshall's law does is to, in fact, take ESP as the communication category.
That is, it might happen, for instance, that we're having ESP all the time, except that my pattern of elephant is very much like your pattern for
fish. So whenever I'm thinking something like fish, and you're thinking something like elephant, we have a great tendency to do so, both of us.
Now sure, you can set this up in a communication paradigm once you discover that my fish was like your elephant. or vice versa, but it certainly
wouldn't look at all like a mental radio. It might well be that we could learn to send messages if we had, for instance, half a dozen people who were
dispersed around the world of whom we'd ascertain that their patterns for particular symbols were fairly similar, and we could train them to
detect the change in their own pattern when somebody else thought one of the other people produced there and so you can get a kind of course code in
terms of recognize change what when I think the does anything happen to that to that thing and if it does then I've got one point of the message and
say this is consistent with what we know it's different certainly unconventional. And it clearly could be a quite good kind of science fiction
story. Now, I'm not saying someone's got to write that story. All I'm saying is that would in some ways be a rather better kind of ESP sort of story
than some of the ones we get. Or it's a pity that someone is not doing that sort of thing, I think. I just think we're going to have to sort of cut this
short now anyway. I thought there were no more questions. I'd like to thank you guys.
Popular,
if you like it. It's not popular most of it. Anyway, the lyrics to all this can be found in the latter half of your handbook on five pages in the
latter part of the handbook. It's mainly if you want to sing along. Most of it's lyrical content on the science fiction. The first track is by
Genesis called Watcher of the Skies.
The
first tracks by Genesis called Watcher of the Skies and it was apparently inspired by the letter part of childhood's end.
Music
playing
playing Music
Music
playing
Give
me
whom I can no longer
find.
Bring life beyond the gladdened
known. Future shape.
The life again destroyed life. Do they play elsewhere? Do they...
From life alone, to life as one. Sing us now, your journey's done.
You know you
Yeah!
The next track is Wooden Ships by Crossby Stills and Nash and this is about a classic science fiction situation about the aftermath of an atomic
war.
If
you
smile at me, I will
understand This love is nothing, but we've got to help her well
I can't see by your cold breath You're from the other side But just one thing I got to know Can you tell me please? Don't worry
They kind of love summer Yeah, I've been eating him since seven weeks now, haven't got any sick ones, so I'll pick you up so you can lie
Wooden ships on the water, very free and easy. You know the way it's supposed to be. Silver on the shoreline, let us be. Talking about very free.
you
You
know me though
Music
playing
Go,
take the system
and buy the hand
Need her away from this foreign land Fall away, where we're not left again We are leaving, you don't need her
And
it's a fair wind, blowing warm out of the sky from its shoulders.
I guess I'll
sit across the road. The next track by Pink Floyd is no lyrics of real consequences. It's only the music and the science fiction content, setting
control for the heart of the sun.
Oh,
wow.
Thank
you.
You're
right.
You get close to much
Yeah.
Music
playing
Oh,
oh
So
the
next track is by King Crimson, 21st century skit-sword man. It's exactly nine as you turn it here by the music.
Music
playing
...
Yeah.
Oh.
Oh,
it's all in jumbly. Now the years gone, it really is. When the birth and dreams get so damn long.
The next track is about as good an example of science fiction as you likely to find in music by a vandagraph generator. It's called... what is
it called? It's called The Pioneers Overseas, it's about what happens when a group of people travels faster than the speed of light. It's about
the very strange things that happen.
That's the Earth in 1983 Thinkers groaning for the galaxy Red and I set up into the void A thousand stars to be exploited Somebody help
In
the dark, in the dark. It is
the dark around. No life, no hope, no sound. No chance of being home again
The
universe
And
you won't be
here without me
We are the pioneers. We are the soft ones. We are the ones that are going to build a statue for inventories
ago, or we're going to 1640.
A small,
big whisper in our lock one did reassure them
and to get back in. Bending eyes from the dead unknown, the ones they were about to go. Somebody help me, I'm in pain. Somebody help me, I'm in pain
now. Touched with my mind,
I have no praise.
I do the hell am I? People singing and aim them away.
What is my plea?
There
is
no beyond
here
Of course not just
being exist In this place where
living And the wing of
being I've never been heard of
The
End
I don't
know.
Music
playing
To
wonder
in a living death, living empty master, empty breath, somebody help me.
No
one should touch people around No one should touch
We
are aware of existence. Existing
I am
the lost one. I am the one you fear. I am the lost one. I am the one you cross your face. Or stay where I was. Or didn't exist in the past.
I'm
sorry. The next track is by Genesis, it's called Get Him Out by Friday and it was based on a, believe it or not, a real estate ad. And an interesting
extrapolation of what might happen in the future with regard to this sort of thing. It's
quite amusing.
He's
the best man that we know to love. Oh
no, this is so cold in here. Oh, I can't hear you.
And
if this isn't easy, then we let you sleep, and our brothers won't shoot out your way. For this time, we'll make our dreams come true. I
don't know why it seems so funny Seeing as how they take over
The
Wiggler called again the weekend of his morning. Four hundred pounds for the wrap of the famous bow. A lot of that essential teaching. I think
we're going to find it hard.
You
and I. Here we are, he's calling us down the next night. He'll knock us off his bed. He's coming at us. That means it's not time to break the spell and
make him face the main occasion.
Oh,
man, I'll be out of here tonight.
you
Music
playing
This
is the announcement of your mystic control. This is Mars, and you see too, for we, ever before, a Christian, are you connoisseurs? I hear the
directions. Our genetic control has been wiped off from us as a recently being so, taking bids so so bold. It's said, now the people will be closer
tonight. They can slice as many in the same building size. They say yes or no.
In the
interest of humanity, they've been told they must go, told they must go, go, go, go.
You'll
be happy on earth. Let him beg in the church for your heaven.
For anyone who wants to hear eight minutes more, that's all clear. Two tracks by the Merling Road.
I
can see all the strange and distant times Traveling and planning all the rags to fly burning
stars freezing in the emptiness of where he comes from.
Feeding
the shadow of the year, Oh.
Oh. Oh. Oh. Oh. Oh.
It's
your brain, it isn't time to travel in the back of the way to the side
I'm
coming home I'm coming home
and
waiting
for a friend to play with. Why have I been alone so long?
We
know there's no one there.
Look,
I gather all you want to With no one here to stop you from my hand Soon
you will see
Come from Afghanistan.
But don't
be alarmed
by my fields and my forest.
You
look
and
gather all you want to. There's no one here to stop you from it. All the cheer and waiting
to
understand me I hope it won't be very long
Around about 7 o'clock we'll start with a little commencement of the evening program which is taught by Mr Andrew Bear who's on the staff at
Flinders University. He's just recently returned from England. He's going to talk on film censorship both in England and Australia. And some
of you that read National Review, he had an interesting letter in last week's National Review. I'll leave it to him.
Thanks, but anybody who stands up in public to talk about censorship should undertake two things. First is to try and say something new and fresh
about a rather dreary, entire topic. The second is be prepared to stand up and be counted and say what he thinks censorship policy should be. I
hope the body of the paper I give tonight will, to some extent, fulfill the first obligation. And the second, I'll fulfill now.
First, I think censorship is important. This is my credo, if you like. Second, I'm in favour of the status quo. I think that Australia at the
present time has a censorship system that works, which is administered by people who've been working properly, so that the balance just at the
present time seems to me to be about right. Third, I think that Sue argues that a complete abolition of censorship in Australia at the present
time is politically and socially unrealistic. Fourth, I don't think I'd advocate complete abolition anyway for three reasons. First is that I
think that there should be some maintenance at least of the laws of libel, though not necessary in the present form. I think this because I think
that any individual in a society has a right to be protected against what others might say about him or her. Second, I think that there ought to be
properly a prohibition on manifestly socially dangerous propaganda in a society, and the two forms that I would think of particularly here,
propaganda on the subjects of racism and anti-Semitism. by which I don't mean to say that the existence of racist and anti-Semitic attitudes in
a society cannot be discussed or dramatized in the utter entertainment that a society has. I think finally that there should be some
restrictions on the circulation of highly evocative material. That is, I think that it wouldn't suggest that such prohibitions are such
restrictions. I'm
just nearly in college. I know of no good reason at all why erotic material should be subject to control. But so long as adults in a society have
access to material of quality in this field, I'm prepared rather reluctantly to concede that other people, if they want to, can restrict the
circulation of commercial hardcore pornography in general and can restrict the access of young people to all forms of erotic material. That's
a deal I'm prepared to make with other people in the society. Sixth implicit in that is the view I hold, which is that the so-called artistic merit
criterion in censorship should be maintained and used. Can I say that? Acknowledging all the faults and difficulties and illogicalities that
the use of the artistic merit criterion imposes. Now, it's obvious from that that my position on censorship is an entirely pragmatic one. It's
based on my understanding of the social and political realities of present day Australian society. And that my reasons for accepting a
pragmatic position instead of making a stand on principle, I hope will be some of the things that emerge from what I have to say. OK, well, that's
me. That's what I believe. That's the position from which I speak. Now, the debate about censorship is different from censorship itself, an
important element of it in Australia. has changed radically in the last three years. And the change in the debate about censorship follows
directly on a radical change in the practice censorship in this country. Practice that was changed during the ministry, the customs ministry
of Donald Chipp. Now prior to 1970, the people who publicly manifested a concern over censorship, that is the people who conducted the debate,
were civil libertarians, artists, and those who wanted access to books and films which they weren't at that time allowed to see. They were
fighting for the liberalization of an almost unbelievably restrictive censorship policy which had made Australia a joke in the Western
world. The field of publishing, book publishing for example, was widely known that the phrase Australian edition of a book was synonymous with
the phrase expugated edition. God knows Those people who conducted that debate and that fight had something to fight above. And it seems to me
that the story of the eventual success is something that I regard as mildly inspirational. However, there were no particular heroes. And it's
not my concern tonight to speculate about possible influences, who in this debate influenced who. But I think that four things in this latent
movement up to the 1970s stand out as important influences or determining factors. What I've mentioned first is the constant example of the
censorship practice in England and particularly of the work of Mr John Trevelyan who until 1971 and for many years was secretary the British
Board of Film Sensors. I might add since I'll be referring to him several times tonight that John Trevelyan is by way of being a hero of mine.
Indeed I wish it were he who was coming on a lecture tour of Australia later this year. rather than Mrs. Mary Whitehouse, who is being brought out
here sometime in the near future. And I would, in fact, seriously recommend to those who are concerned about censorship that they invite Mr.
Traversion to come to offer, as it were, the other side of the question, to the one that Mrs. Whitehouse is going to put. There are good grounds for
that too, since the people who are inviting her are people who claim publicly that they believe in balance, and in always seeing the two sides of a
case. should be presented. It seemed to me that he would be an admirable person to do that. So that there's the example of censorship in England,
which I think had its influence in what happened in Australia after 1970. Secondly, there was a publication in 1968 by John Bennett, secretary
of the Victorian Council for Civil Liberties of a booklet called Freedom of Expression in Australia. The title I take it sufficiently
indicates what the book was about. The point I want to make about it is that although that book contained very little, it was new. It was very
persuasively, very powerfully argued, very well documented, and widely read in influential circles. So there was a timely booklet in 1968.
Third, there was a particularly revealing controversy. In 1968, again, one of the interminable rows that blows up over censorship This case,
over the censoring of a Swedish film called I Love You Love, some of you might remember. What had happened was that in 1968 the Australian film
festivals and their committees, which were a pretty active pressure group anyway, had finally after a long battle got special permission,
special concession to import films without, for showing at film society meetings only, that is to a restrictive membership. got the mission to
import films without them first, going through the machinery of government censorship. Now what happened was that that agreement having been
made, the then government, through the then Minister of Customs, which of course before Chip, this was a man named Senator Scott, interfered
after all. And what was revealed here, and the reason I think this particular fuss is more important than the others, was that there was a
particularly blatant example of incompetent and repressive bureaucracy. What happened was that the Minister for Customs alleged that two
characters in the film were committing sexual intercourse. One of them was seven months pregnant. That was the woman.
Now, it turned out on inspection of the film, close inspection, discussion with the director, who happened to be in the country at the same time,
and discussion with the actress. that in fact they weren't committing sexual intercourse at all. What's more, it was further established that
given that the woman was seven months pregnant and given the position they were shown to be in in the film, it was physically impossible that they
should have been. At this point, even the Sydney Morning Herald was moved to point out the absurdity of a situation. It was removed from remark on
the absurdity of a situation where so much power lies in the hands of a man who was prepared to make a fuss about sexual intercourse being shown on
screen, but he couldn't recognise it when it was before his eyes. So that I think that particular round, one of the many, had its influence on what
happened. Talking finally, in Adelaide detail, there was the publication in 1970 by Max Harris and Geoffrey Dutton of a book called
Australia's Centreship Crisis. Now, the title, certainly at that time, reflected the feeling of urgency that many people have, the sense that
Australia, in this situation, essentially was at a point of crisis, and that the book was, from that point of view, a very timely one. Now, if you
look at the book, you'll find that its general tone is strident. You'd expect angry, because you'd expect that the general line of argument is
very, very hard-hitting. In particular, there was a forcefully argued case against the system of film censorship contributed by Eric
Williams. This case, again, didn't contain much that was new by way of argument, was heavily derivative from the book by Bennett. But it did
contain, I think this is important, an absolutely devastating list of the films that were presently cut and banned in Australia. And one of the
further things that was devastating about this, not only just by looking at them and asking yourself what on earth was wrong with that, the
service of devastating because it actually broke the secret because at that time the names of films that were cut and banned was actually kept
secret by officials. Williams came up with the obviously well-informed and yet absolutely incredible estimate that in 1969, fully one in
three of all feature length films imported into Australia had been cut by the censors, one in three. Furthermore, he made it clear, what had
already been known but had never been quite as obvious as this before, that virtually the whole cinematic genre of the horror film was being not
cut but banned, excluded entirely from Australia on the inexplicable grounds that they were undesirable in the public interest. One of the
things that was discovered, which not very many people have known, was that it was actually the case that the customs people were working as one
of their criteria for the banning of films, that films should be declared by them to be undesirable in the public interest, so that horror films
were something that you simply couldn't see in Australia at that time. Now, what I'm suggesting is that those four factors were among the
immediate causes of the radical change in Australian censorship that took place under Donald Shippon after 1970. And the really crucial
changes that he instituted, the changes that make up the basis of the present censorship policy, film censorship policy in Australia, were
these. It seemed to me to be four. It's interesting to note in passing, by the way, that these changes were all either recommended by the writers
of the books that I've mentioned, All were already current practice, the British Board of Film Sensors in England, all both, so that the changes
the chip made after 1970 were drawn in part fairly obviously from those sources. The four major changes seem to me to be these. First, the process
of censorship in Australia became open rather than secret. These lists of banned and cut films with reasons for the banning or cutting were
published and still are being published. Now, it's a great pity that after its initial enthusiasm, the Australian press has got rather sick of
reprinting these things, so they now, although they exist, are a bit hard to find. But more important than this, Chip did something else that had
never been done in Australia before. And that is that he, as Minister of Customs, as a public figure, began discussing censorship publicly,
frequently, and intelligently. That is, he made its censorship in Australia begin to look like part of a democratic, rather than part of an
authoritarian process. This was exactly what John Trevelyan, keeps emerging as an important figure in the back of us, had been doing in England
for years. One of Trevelyan's favourite ploys was to go around the country lecturing especially at universities. The universe is a place where
the censor is a name that is not held up in great admiration. And Travelling used clearly to enjoy to present himself to large crowds of
university audiences and wow them. That is so that these people who hated him when they started came away thinking, what a marvelous man he was. I
might say that I'm the victim of just such a performance, hence my admiration for the man. But what Chip did by making it public was to indicate or
to make obvious in Australia that censorship is something that doesn't just happen out there or up there. He made it obvious that it is something
that is done and can be seen to be being done by people in the society which we live. That is, it's being done by identifiable people for more or less
identifiable reasons. So that that seems to me, to make it public seems to me to first and one of the most important aspects of the ship
revolution. Second, was the introduction after a long process of argument and controversy of the R-certificate, the film, that is the adults'
own certification. Interestingly, despite what some people, the Institute's enemies are saying at the present time, he did this not only
against the opposition of the the Attorney's General of the various states, but also against the trenchant opposition of the film
distribution industry itself. But anyway, what the introduction they asked if it could be, and is still doing, is that for the first time in
Australia, film censorship is done on a basis of using an adult to the standard rather than a child. Third, underchip, the Australian film
censorship policy was liberalised. Of course, it was made possible by the introduction of the R-certificate. And with an R-certificate, it
was possible for the censor to release films for adult distribution, which had previously in Australia have been either banned or cancelled.
It also made it possible for the artistic merit criterion to be used for the first time in any serious way in Australian film censorship. And this
was a major step that I'll be saying something about a little bit later. And the one I've already implied in my view about the artistic merit
criterion is that I think it's illogical. I think it raises enormous philosophical issues that it works. And it works particularly because it
allows one to make a distinction between a serious film on whatever subjects and commercial pornography. Now, of course, that distinction, if
you press it, may then break down in your hands. But you can set it up and use it as a criterion, as a distinction, in the practical everyday
business of censoring. Because in the practical everyday business of censoring, somebody has to sit there and make a decision. Does this thing
go through or does it not? In a situation like that, a practical, workable standard is perhaps more use than a fully philosophically viable one.
introduced the concept of community standards as the main basis by which film censorship in Australia would operate. And he did this in order to
replace the mismatch of older criteria which were based ultimately on the 19th century judgement that that which is censurable is that which
has the power to deprive and corrupt those who may come under its influence. It is the depraven corrupt criterion had been the dominant one in
Australia and it was replaced in the 1970s by the community standards one. Again, a standard that the British border film censors had been using
under John Travellian for many years. What this means is that a film may be released if in the judgment of the censorship board By taking into
account the prevailing normal adult community standards on the subject of that film, then that film, if it is in accordance with these
prevailing standards, then that film can be released. Once again, you'll notice, and this has been pointed out many times, that it's not a
criterion that will stand up to close analysis. Because you can't measure prevailing normal adult community standards any more
scientifically or objectively than you can measure artistic merits or, for that matter, any more scientifically or objectively better than
you can measure depravity or corruption. Once again, I think it's the point that Chip has made himself effectively enough, for all its faults,
it's a criterion that works. One of its great advantages is that it gives censorship the flexibility to move with changes in society. And that's
something that the community standards criterion does, as far as I can see, no other does. OK, well, that roughly was the ship revolution in
censorship as I see it. And I suppose I've made it clear by now that I think we all have a reason to be grateful for the man who carried it through. I
might add, a reason to be grateful for those in the present government who are by and large pursuing the policies that he established.
Australia, at long last, it seems to me, finds itself more or less in line to censorship practice with the other Western democracies, and
particularly in line with England and the United States. Now, if that's the point of the chip revolution, it is also the point at which, if I can
return to this, the debate about censorship changed. As it had already done, and the same thing had happened, it had already done six or seven
years earlier in England. So I said before, earlier than 1970 in Australia, the debate about censorship had been conducted by artists and civil
libertarians. They were doing the debating because they wanted to see the system changed. Now, what happened was that once the system was
changed, these people who had been doing, conducting the debating about censorship, fill it to the background. That is, they moved out of the
arena of the argument about censorship to be replaced by another group. A group who for many years, and for very good reasons, had been
relatively quiet on the subject of censorship in Australia. After 1970, after the Chip Revolution, these people came out fighting. And
they're still there, just out there, especially in the city of churches, fighting hard at this very moment. I find them a very difficult group to
describe, very difficult group to put a name to, but let me just introduce the two phrases that I'll use to describe them, hopefully without
being too many questions. I shall revert them interchangeably as moral reformers or representatives of the moral right wing. Present time
seems to me they are very active and potentially very important in Australia indeed. A moral reform, as it happens, is a subject that I find
fascinating. Indeed, there are some people who collect pornography, and I collect anti-pornography pamphlets. So as it happens, censorship
is of course only one dimension of the work of moral reform. What you find, if you look over your history, either in a long or a short term, is that
there are long series of organized moral reform movements. that spring up in a society whenever the moral dimension of that society is felt to be
at a point of change, that in fact, as the way moral reform works, is most of the time. There are nearly always moral reform movements around in one
area, moral behaviour for another. If you look through your history of moral reform in Australia, you get a fascinating story, as you'd expect
given Australia's fairly lively history. For example, take a few examples of earlier ones. Kind of massive moral reform movement in the 19th
century, based on the whole issue of Sunday observance. And it was only very recently that they lost the Melbourne and the Adelaide Sunday of
very recent parts of things that I suppose we all remember. The whole series of moral reform movements set up around the question of alcohol in
society, the prohibitionists who emerge and re-emerge from time to time. Then there were the six o'clock closes in the 1950s and early 1950s.
There was a great phase in the Australian history. There were the anti-gamblers who were at it again. I see now that people, politicians in
Australia are talking about setting up casinos in Tasmania and now I gather one Victor Harve is it going to be? Matthew Ambue, wherever. Then
there were the anti-sea bathers, moral reform movements, who for many years kept that great symbol of Australian society empty of the
populace, the beach. And when they lost the first stage of that battle, when people were actually allowed on the beach to go swimming, they kept
them for many years further in neck to knee bathing costumes. And of course there are those developers, but that's the current of the area that I
think that the current problem will be in that sort of historical context. the current crop of moral reformists should be sent. Of course,
they're not all people of the past. One can see these sorts of movements very actively in Australia, but I mean other areas, particularly the
groups concerned with who are opposed to the easing or the likely proposition of dissent. The divorce laws in Australia should be eased, and of
course, there is the anti-abortion lobby. If any of you are interested in this, there's a very interesting book about the history of moral
reform in Australia by a man named Keith Dunstan called simply Wousers. Now, the arts and entertainment, as you'd expect, have always been a
rich field for these groups of moral reformers, so that their re-emergence at the present time, something that anybody who takes an historical
view of, just as I'm trying to do, will find their emergence at the present time entirely predictable. The history of censorship, in fact, I
would argue, is the history of the strength of moral reform groups at any given time in a society. Now I would define it. The system of censorship,
I would suggest, in any society at any time, is a compromise, which is established between the moral reformers on the one hand and the rest of
society on the other. It has always been so, I believe, it will always remain so, and it's my feeling that in a democratic society, it probably
should remain so. To make a reference again to John Traveller, he defined censorship, that is, he actually offered, he the censor, offered his
definition of what censorship was by saying that the role of the censor in any society is that of the protector of the arts, the censor as the
protector of the arts against what he called grassroots Philism. He maintained that if it wasn't for him, the hated censor, it wasn't for him,
England would move into a phase of intolerable moral repression in the arts. That is, he saw himself the censor as the figure standing between
the distribution of art as it was in the 1960s, early 1970s, and what he called intolerable moral repression. He saw himself as it were the
backstop, the protector of the arts. It does seem to me that, as I read, what has happened in England lately, that the evidence is on his side. That
is, I think his analysis is substantially true. I think there are problems. I think one could, in this new age of ours, make the same kind of case in
Australia. That, if I can just go back, is essentially why my position, the personal position on censorship that I outlined, is that
essentially pragmatic ones are not a pure one. The censorship system, This is my definition of it now, is a temporary compromise established
between conflicting social groups at a given time in society. Sensitivity system can be understood and discussed seriously and
intelligently, it seems to me, only if it is viewed as a social process. If it is seen in its social context as a compromise worked up between
competing social groups in the society. Now, as it happens, the history of the cinema, I can other line on this, in the West, was actually written
by the moral right wing. That is, the rise of commercial cinema, which we can conveniently date from the 30s, the rise of the commercial cinema
prompted a massive outburst of moral reform activity. And at that time, the moral reform was one hands down. Now it's from that period, from that
period of moral controversy and fuss, that the old system of Australian film censorship was established in the first place. And that's why,
from those origins, it was as repressive as we now know it could be. Furthermore, the success of the 1930s moral reformers in America brought
about the self-regulation of the motion picture industry in the form of the now famous or infamous Hayes Code, which was first written out in the
1930s, and which wasn't seriously challenged from within the film industry until Otto Creminger, forced through his own film, 1953, a film
some of you might know, called The Moon is Blue. Under the controversy, the reason that film was the breakthrough. Now, pathetic to look back,
but the issue was whether the characters in that film could use the terms and discuss the concepts of virginity and seduction. They weren't
going to sort of, as it were, They weren't going to do anything about the virginity of the character, and they weren't going to engage in
seduction in the film. The issue was whether the terms could be used in the script. But it was because of the operations of the Hayes Code that
Hollywood, through the 30s, 40s and 50s, had that awful stress on moral endings, crime does not pay, all the rest of it, all the incredible
restrictions on what actors and actresses could be seen to be doing on screen. This was the business about the prohibitions of open mouth
kissing, the fact that no two characters even fully dressed, if our man and female could be seen, could be shown, be in the same bed, or if they
were, there was a lent out to this one, one of them could have a leg stretched over the side on the ground and that made it okay. This was the
self-regulatory system that was introduced by Hollywood under pressure from the 30s moral reformers. The reason they did it was precisely the
reason that Trevelyan described himself as the the barrier between artistic freedom of some kind, limited artistic freedom, and intolerable
moral repression. They did it. The film industry did it itself. Worked the code itself because they felt that if they didn't, if they couldn't be
seen to be cleaning up their own stable, other people would step in and take action. This was, of course, very likely. Anyway, that particular
censorship compromise, which of course heavily favored what I'm calling the moral right wing, was maintained for fully 40 years until 1970 in
Australia. The influence of those moral reformers in the 30s that determined what all our film experience until recently was actually like.
Now, once the tide began to turn, against the moral reformers, they of course re-emerged in a new and active phase. And I'd like to suggest that
the process by which this works can best be seen by taking the example not of Australia for the moment, but of England. And that one can see the
process beginning in England in 1964. with the establishment or the formation in the Birmingham Town Hall by Mrs. Mary Whitehouse of the what
was then called the Clean Up TV Campaign. Cleanup TV campaign which later became and still is called the National Viewers and Listeners
Association. Mary Whitehouse is the founder and currently the secretary of that organization. She's the lady who is coming, the invitation to
the festival by others on a lecture tour of Australia later this year. She is now, I might add, a very powerful woman in England indeed. One of the
things she claims to have done, and there is some justice in the claim, is to have won a massive victory against the BBC, as it was under the
Director-Generalship of Sir Hugh Carlton Green, who retired or resigned rather in 1967. And it's certainly true that with the departure of
Hugh Carlton Green from the BBC, the cleanup TV campaign's main target The late night satire shows and the famous Wednesday plays disappeared
with him. Those are things now the BBC doesn't do. Green himself, as Director-General, stood out all the time he held office against tomorrow
reform is a cleanup TV campaign. He expressed his contempt for them and would have nothing to do with it. One of Mrs. Whitehouse's loudest
complaints is that under the wicked Sir Hugh Carlton Green, she was never invited into the portals of the BBC. She was a member of the public of a
democracy like England. Certainly true that since his resignation, The BBC has moved away from the experimental phase it was in at that time.
It's not just a question of the late-night Saturday shows and the Wednesday plays. The BBC's whole output, it seems to me, now is much less
experimental, much less critical of society than it has been. It's also true that the new director-general, Lord Hill, has been much more
accommodating. Mrs. Mary Whitehouse on the Cleanup TV campaign, he does things which she knew Carl Green never did like reply, polite to her
letters, invite her in to talk to him on occasion, and even allow her to appear in discussion programs on BBC television. Now, since then, since
the early phase of their activities directed against the BBC, the activities of the National Viewers and Listeners Association have
broadened and that we can now see in England, I believe, the shape of a newer and potentially even more powerful movement with worldwide
connections. The signal moment in this, it seems to me, was the publication in 1972 of the Longford Report on Pornography. At its best, in my
view, one of the most sophisticated pro-censorship documents that's ever been written. That's mixed judgments, by the way. Not only the
document, I'd add, but the whole controversy and sort of line lines. that the Longford Committee managed to establish it. So one of the curious
things about the Longford Committee was that it was entirely self-appointed. It is nobody in any position of authority wrote down at any time
that this committee should establish itself, carry out its investigations and write its report. They appointed themselves, they set
themselves up, they organized the meetings and publications of the report themselves, though the thing has in some strange way, partly
perhaps by the title, I don't know, in some strange way sort of taken on a sense of officially important. Certainly I thought, when I first heard
the publicity for it in the Australian press, that it was a government-sponsored publication, which it turns out, indeed, not to have been. So
that, I think, is a signal moment in the emergence of what I will be describing later as a new phase, moral reformism, the Western democracies.
Longford Report was preceded and I think influenced by two earlier very important events in America. One was the appearance in 1970 of Charles
H. Keating's dissents. from the President Johnson's commission on obscenity and pornography. I don't think the commission report itself is a
matter of great significance. I think that Senator Keating's dissent from it is. Senator Keating, if you may know, was the President Nixon
nominee to the Johnson Commission. At the change of the presidency, the commission had been set up, set up and appointed under President
Johnson, and that one of President Nixon's early acts, after 96 years in New York, was to appoint a nominee of his own onto that commission, and
that nominee produced a minority report. The second event in America was President Nixon's tension in the angry rejection of the
recommendations of the report itself, when it finally came up. The rejection contained a surprising number of quotations from the dissenting
judgment made by child-age kids. The commission itself, of course, recommended that All official legislation relating to the circulation of
erotic material for adults should be repealed. So that I'm suggesting that the Keating dissent and President Nixon's rejection of the Johnson
Commission report were important events in the background of what happened in England leading up the Longford report. Of course now one can see
a further step in all this to be the new group on the horizon, something that has grown out of this sort of environment, I might call it that,
relationship is the ominously titled Festival of Lights. had a succession of very large marches and meetings in England and is now organising
in Australia, as you no doubt know. There is, I believe, a march for purity coming up soon. Now, as it curiously, the target for these new moral
reform groups in England, that's a very surprising but very critical and important target. The target that these groups are now aiming
themselves at, so to speak, is the British Board of Film Sensors. In particular, they are aiming themselves at the now secretary of the British
Board of Film Centres, Mr Stephen Murphy, who took over in 1971 when Travesion returned. Indeed, at the present time, a new move, a quite
revolutionary move, as far as moral reform and the arts is concerned, is an attempt by a representative of these moral reform organisations in
England to sue the secretary of the British Board of Film Sensors and the chairman of the British Board of Film Sensors for the crime of releasing
obscenity, to which the film Last Tango in Paris. It is, I might suggest, a very sophisticated and a very, very potentially important legal
manoeuvre. It took a brilliant legal mind to conceive of the idea of a moral reform group taking the censor to course. Of course, also, if you
think about it, Croydon also has its comic implications. And not surprisingly then, we see a similar movement emerging in Australia. And just
as predictably, it first started emerging in Adelaide, whereas it happened the policies of the state government here made the break up of the
old censorship moral order that much more apparent in South Australia than it was elsewhere. I mean, one could fairly say, I suppose, that a
state like Victoria, when the Office of Attorney General was held first of all by Sir Arthur Ryler and then by Mr Ma that were friends like that who
needs a moral reform movement. Anyway, to mark the change in what happened, we see that all the new publications on the subject of censorship in
Australia are from the right. And I have them here. If anybody would like to see them afterwards, I'm thinking in particular of no, no, Calcutta,
why? Facts and figures. Changing community standards, J.H. Corby. Stand up and be counted. I just bought that yesterday, that's very nice.
Stand up and be counted by J.H. Corby in association with Ms. Helen Caterham. Now, the main spokesman, as I see it, for the new kinds of moral
reform movements in Australia at present time, is indeed the same J.H. Corby. He is certainly the Maine, in some ways the most impressive,
though that's another qualified judgment, most impressive spokesman for these movements in print. He is, by the way, among other things, Vice
President of the Community Standards Organization. He's also the vice... National Vice President of the Community Standards Organization,
right? And he is also Chairman of the Australian Festival of Life Committee in South Australia. Whether he is going to be the one who emerges as
Australian equivalent of Mary Whitehouse remains to be seen. But I offer this prediction with absolute certainty that if he doesn't, somebody
will. The movement, I suggest, is crying out for a leader and it will find one. The Community Standards Organisation, by the way, is an
interesting side issue about that, is the now name of what was originally called the Moral Actions Meeting. There's a very interesting
parallel between that and what happened in England where the Cleanup TV campaign changed its name to the National Viewers and Listeners
Association. It does seem that in the early phases of moral reform movements, there's a kind of rhetorically and militramatic impetus which
leads to these rather startling titles for organizing the Cleanup TV campaign indeed, but that as they get older and more mature, there seems to
be a need to make themselves sound that much more respectable. Certainly, community standards organization sounds a mild thing compared to a
moral action committee. Now, I don't propose at this stage to enter into the lists with a detailed critique of the arguments and the activities
of the current crop of moral reformers, though I must say that I find it tempting to do so. It's easy to make fun of them. The point I want to make
tonight is that it is a good deal easier still to underestimate their potential influence, to underestimate what they can do. I want to round off
this talk by noting that For all its similarities to this one, the current moral reform movement seems to me to have some portentous new features
about it, which probably deserve to be treated very seriously indeed. Now, as I said, it used to be very easy to make fun of moral reform movements
and make fun of their leaders and their organization or their disorganizations, as usually the case, and of their publications. In Australia,
this was particularly easy and of course was a, for years, a favourite game by liberals and intellectuals because moral reformers tended to be
isolated cranks, people who were completely ignorant of the complexities underlying the the simplistic stances that they took on critical
issues. Or alternatively, they tended to be politicians who had a gift for sending themselves up. You all remember, I suppose, Sir Arthur
Ryler's contribution to the debate about the group, referring to his non-existent teenage sons and daughters who he didn't want to see reading
that book. And then there was still is, to that matter, the red Brisbane dentist, whom you've no doubt heard, Alan Russell, the man who has to his
achievement, the fact that he Brisbane, the African dance group a few years ago, that he Brisbane alone, Australia the girls have to wear
Braziers, the man who when the federal government released Lolita, Lady Chatterlene and two other books, sent a telegram, that famous
telegram, to all federal empties in Canberra, which reads, in parts. If Australia's moral decline is to be halted, the present malfunctioning
censorship machinery operated by four intellectuals and most academics must be replaced by a common sense down-to-earth body drawn from
average homes, not university, hot houses, stock. Men like that, one doesn't I suggest, have to take very seriously. What I do want to argue is
that these new groups are different. And they're different partly because, and I find this myself slightly paradoxical, they are different in
part because they are themselves, the products of this democratic, officious, Sorry, this democratic, efficient, commissive, mass media
dominated society that they themselves are so busy attacking. Let me put this into a number of stages. First, they seem to need to be different
and more significant than early immoral reform organizations movements because they are organized to a degree that I've never come across or
seen before. Crucially, what has been recognized by the modern crop of moral reformers is that they cannot convert people straight up to their
point of view via rhetoric. But what they can do, and can do effectively, is operate successfully as self-consciously political pressure
groups in a society. It seems to me that that is the way they have now defined their role, not as converters of the reluctant masses. Of course,
they claim that the masses are on their side anyway, but as self-consciously political pressure groups working within the society. Now, this
seems to me to have three implications for the way they work and three implications that have been followed through. First, the new moral reform
groups. have recognised that they must operate on a narrow rather than a broad front. No more huge statements, at least not crucially, that they
depend on huge statements about how society is falling apart. They still say that, but that is no longer their real thrust. They have realised,
it seems to me, that their campaigns must have specific achievable goals. It's very different from saying that you are going to clean up TV.
You're going to do something much more specific than that. For example, they've learned to attack key vulnerable individuals. instead of
fulminating just against the system. The National Viewers and Listeners campaign was not, I suggest, against the BBC, but against the Hugh
Carlton Green, and that is a crucial difference. Even though, as we all know, big institutions like the BBC, in fact, made of the ABC, are
vulnerable to pressure. It is individuals in system of power within them. who are the really vulnerable beings. And, of course, it takes a
degree of sophistication, not previously common among moral reformers, to know the system well enough to be able to recognize the critical and
the potentially weak points of authority, like the Director General for the BBC. His significance in the same way that their target in relation
to film censorship in Britain is the figure of the Secretary himself. Stephen Murphy. It is even more significant that they have begun to move
against the British film censorship at a point where it is weakened. Nobody in England could have touched John Traveller. He was too
established. He'd been there too long. He was too good. What happened was that the moment he resigned, the moral reformers moved against him.
his successor, a younger man, a man without the experience he had for all those years. And they moved at beautifully chosen points. The two films
I picked that he was faced with making decisions just after it was a nasty thing for Travellian to do, I suppose, to resign just then. But God
probably didn't know. Well, I bet he did. The two films that they made issues of, just at the point when the office was taken over, were two really
crucial ones. Kubrick's Clockwork Orange, wouldn't you know, and Sam Feck and Paz's Draw Adults. Two films over which there has been an
enormous fuss in all the sides of the universe. Now, these were the points at which the new, what I've described as the new moral reform groups,
the new specific moral reform groups, moved. So that you get this attack on vulnerable individuals. I would suggest that there was evidence in
Australia that the groups here were already beginning to move against the individual figure of Donald Chipp, who was of course in a vulnerable
position, as sensitive minister of the Liberal Party. Had he been censorship minister of a party of the Labour Party, what would be the use of the
Labour Party, of the ripples he would have been safer, but that he was in a vulnerable position, what I'm suggesting is that people were
beginning to raise a campaign against his policies and against himself in that state. So what I'm arguing here is that there's a new
sophistication in the way that moral reform movements pick out the right targets, the way they restrict the field in which they're going to
operate to identify for themselves achievable, distinct goals. Secondly, since these moral reform movements pride themselves on working
within the law, They have now learned to hire very sharp lawyers indeed, and have learned in fact to use the law to their own purpose. I have, I
would suggest, brought off some brilliant coups. I have an enormous admiration for the mind that lay behind the discovery and the use of the
injunction in the field of censorship, the device that was used in South Australia over the banning of Ocalca. That was a very, very
sophisticated piece of work indeed. They were lucky, of course, one of the judges sent them up, one of the others only agreed with them
apparently reluctantly. They got away with it and made a major coup. And of course they succeeded again with the film in the same way, with the
film of Oak Calcutta working on the assumption, and they're probably right, that the distributors of that film won't take them to court because
the distributors who don't care about freedom of expression or are anything else, obviously, will probably not bother taking them to court
because the money they can't make in Adelaide, they will recoup in Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, wherever. You know, the charities. In
England, as I've already suggested, the same kind of work showing or the same kind of new enthusiasm, new skill evident in the idea of suing the
sensor. That's an apparently fantastic idea. But in England, to take another example, it's been known for years now that the National Viewers
and Listeners Association has been waiting for a television program to come out which their lawyers will tell them they can take to court and
have some hope of winning an obscenity case. It's absolutely unheard of to take a television program, particularly if it's going to be a BBC
television program, and it will be if it happens. Be sure of that. The idea of taking a BBC television program to court for an obscenity case is
another brilliant stroke. Of course, one of the reasons, and this is another indication of this sophistication, I suggest, one of the reasons
that such a program hasn't appeared is precisely because everybody knows they're waiting.
I just noted passing there, by the way, another indication of sophistication, but these people now really also know the law and know where its
weak points are as far as they're concerned. So if you also find very skillful campaigns being started up over specific concepts of law. In
Australia, if you read through the works of J.H. Court, you'll find that two such points, in Australian law and Australian practice, that he has
no worked out quite sophisticated arguments against, are precisely the artistic merit criterion in censorship and precisely the community
standards criteria. These are small, crucial battles which can be won. Third, These people nowadays really use the organisations that they
have. Some of the ploys that they use, a tradition on familiar ones, but on an organised basis they can be very effective indeed. Let me just read
out to you. The list of suggestions that J. H. Court offers in his book, Changing Community Stairs, in a chapter called, interestingly, What Can
I Do? Now the proposition in this chapter is that the reader, the I, is a person who is deeply concerned about the corruption of society and all
that. The argument is that normally people are out, you know, we're all concerned about the corruption of society, but normally in our apathy we
just sit back. Now what we find now, groups who would set out a long list of pieces of advice to this person in the community. First, he is advised to
be informed about the issue. Now that would be a major change. The people who were concerned about the moral corruption of society took the
trouble to find out what they were talking about. It would be almost as if we'd moved into another society. Second, letters to the painter. We all
know that three letters to a newspaper can look like a massive swing from public opinion. Third, phone your television studio. We all know,
again, especially the ABC and on this day tonight, particularly, ten phone calls can jam the switchboard and look like a public revolution.
Fourth, use and make use of the radio talk back program. There's a smooth operation for you. A huge audience available to every one of us and
people being advised to use it. Fifth, call the TV station manager. Now, exist that you get past that bird, let's say a channel 10 who's always
hanging up the phone on your list, does whenever I phone the radio. and insist that you get through the manager and he of course again is a man in a
vulnerable position who must at least put on a show taking account public opinion. Write letters to the Australian Broadcasting Control
Board. There's a move forward too. I can think of moral reform movements in Australia which would never have heard of an organisation like the
Australian Broadcasting Control Board and certainly not know the enormous power that it actually has. That is in fact the case that, again, an
impression of a large public. Upsurge could lead to action by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, which could be very important.
Contact the TV sponsors of programs you don't like. There's a beauty. If you don't go to the station, you go to Hine's soup or whatever and say,
look, I'm a member of the public. I'm buying your stuff, but by God, I'm not going to buy it anymore if you keep sponsoring number 96 or this day
tonight or whatever it is that they happen not to like. Right to MPs, councillors, especially local councillors, we all know how that works,
involve yourselves actively with political groups in the society. The Democratic Labour Party at the last election adopted as its main policy
an anti-permissive. It was, of course, a disaster. As we all know, political disaster, the DLP. I'm not suggesting that anything of this kind
was behind it. Nevertheless, it's an indication of how effective that kind of action could possibly be. I've been waiting for the floodgate
storm. It was in last December. Is that in there? They never do. The trouble with floodgates, as far as one can tell, is a nice one. Right, actively
involve yourself, sorry, join pressure groups, we know about that. Use petitions. Well, now this is an old ploy, but it has a nice tag to it.
Right, petitions to parliament, preferably well presented, that's their thing, but then quote, preferably well presented, and quote,
preferably with the assistance of mass media coverage to publicize the issues at stake. I don't know who's been learning from who there, but
that isn't the technique that the left-wing demonstrators use. So, successfully, I don't know, and an indication that whatever else is
happening these days, a new moral reform movement is willing to learn from experience. That seems to me, by the way, a very subtle and very
sophisticated move, again. And there's suggestions further that the concerned eye in the society can go up, and try and convert to the cause the
local branches of already existing organization. Specifies, for example, the RSL, I might find a few supporters there, Rotary Women's Clubs,
certainly the Country Women's Association Victoria, has an anti-committer plan on its platform already, Parent Teacher Association School
Council.
A
program that doesn't take much imagination, one to be able to see, could be, and you do it on the example of England, can be seen to be being very
effective indeed. In fact, in England, the curious situations of the censorship She worked there a little bit differently. The British Board
of Film Sensors doesn't have the power of the customs department here. It doesn't have the power of law. It is in fact financed by the industry.
Now what happens is that the British Board of Film Sensors gives a certificate to a film and what was discovered quite by accident by somebody in
1967 was that the ultimate power lies with the local authorities. Now, in the case of Joseph Strict's Ulysses, what happened was that the
British border film censors banned it. And as I said that this film cannot be shown in England. The London local council decided that they
approved of the film and put it on. Put it on even though it hadn't been passed by the British Port of Film Census. What's happening now is a lovely
reversal of that. Where the British Port of Film Census have passed last time we were in Paris, straw dolls, top work orange and the devil. Those
are the crucial four cases. What's happening now is that there is an organised letter writing campaign to the local authorities scattered all
over the country, to no individual sympathetic to the cause, giving the impression, again, this huge swing of public opinion, saying this
time, not that, you know, I feel like this should be released, but it should be banned in that area. This, again, is a, for instance, is going to
move indeed. Stephen Murphy claims, this is nobody has found, I don't know, has yet tested, actually claims that he had evidence to establish
that this activity is going on. And what he's claimed in the letter to the Times, signed officially from his own name with his rank, is that there
is, by quote now, material is centrally compiled, that is, in the country by the main organisation, the National Viewers and Listeners
Association, centrally compiled and then distributed to regional members who are invited invited to write individually to local
authorities and thus to create an impression of spontaneous public dismay. It's a very, very, again, a very neat move, an indication of a very
sophisticated understanding of the way the system works. Finally, the last comment I want to make about the new moral reform movements is that
these people, in my view, have paradoxically gone through a process of education in the toughest of all debating schools, that is in the public
eye of the mass media. And that unlike earlier moral reform movements and the representatives thereof, they have learned by experience. It is
now quite common, for example, to see civil libertarians, often people of some intellectual bent and background, people like this being eaten
up in public debate, by people who they clearly regard as easy targets, by ladies like Mary Whitehouse herself, a kindly provincial
middle-aged housewife who gives every appearance of being so. one of the most frightening things I've ever seen. I think to see her simply eat on
television, uh, sophisticated intellectuals who clearly think she's an easy target. The difference is that she has learned in the hard school
of public television. One of the things about the new moral reformer is that he or she is placed directly in the public light. Not a question of
standing back in your dentist surgery in Brisbane and writing letters or sending telegrams. You are drawn up into the public eye. You simply
have to learn your facts, to learn your arguments, get them straight and to be able to handle them. And this I suggest is what happened. England
seems to make the moment to be strewn with the bodies of liberal intellectuals who thought people like Mary Whitehouse were easy targets. I
think that it's clear, as one looks at the material with the Moral Action Committees have put out, that they've reached the stage of
sophistication where they are prepared to have a sort of list, if you will, of different kinds of arguments to suit different kinds of
audiences. I suppose we're all familiar, even in Australia, with the Moral Reformer, who comes to the State of the University.